The Project Gutenberg EBook of The System of Nature, Volume 2, by
Paul Henri Thiery (Baron D'Holbach)

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The System of Nature, Volume 2

Author: Paul Henri Thiery (Baron D'Holbach)

Commentator: Samuel Wilkinson

Translator: Samuel Wilkinson


Release Date: September, 2005 [EBook #8910]
This file was first posted on August 23, 2003
Last Updated: June 8, 2013

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SYSTEM OF NATURE, VOLUME 2 ***




Produced by Freethought Archives and Distributed Proofreaders







THE SYSTEM OF NATURE;

or,

_THE LAWS_ of the MORAL AND PHYSICAL WORLD.



TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL FRENCH OF M. DE MIRABAUD



VOL. II.





PRODUCTION NOTES: First published in French in 1770 under the pseudonym
of Mirabaud. This e-book based on a facsimile reprint of an English
translation originally published 1820-21. This e-text covers the second
of the original two volumes.





CONTENTS


      PART II.  Of the Divinity.--Proofs of his existence.--
      Of his attributes.--Of his influence over the happiness of man.


CHAP. I. The origin of man's ideas upon the Divinity.

CHAP. II. Of mythology.--Of theology

CHAP. III. Of the confused and contradictory ideas of theology.

CHAP. IV. Examination of the proofs of the existence of the Divinity, as
given by Clarke.

CHAP. V. Examination of the proofs offered by Descartes, Malebranche,
Newton, &c.

CHAP. VI. Of Pantheism; or of the natural ideas of the Divinity.

CHAP. VII. Of Theism--Of the System of Optimism--Of Final Causes

CHAP. VIII. Examination of the Advantages which result from Man's
Notions on the Divinity;--of their Influence upon Morals;--upon
Politics;--upon Science;--upon the Happiness of Nations, and that of
individuals.

CHAP. IX. Theological Notions cannot be the Basis of
Morality.--Comparison between Theological Ethics and Natural
Morality--Theology prejudicial to the Human Mind.

CHAP. X. Man can form no Conclusion from the Ideas which are offered him
of the Divinity.--Of their want of just Inference.--Of the Inutility of
his Conduct.

CHAP. XI Defence of the Sentiments contained in this Work.--Of
Impiety.--Do there exist Atheists?

CHAP. XII. Is what is termed Atheism, compatible with Morality?

CHAP. XIII. Of the motives which lead to what is falsely called
Atheism.--Can this System be dangerous?--Can it be embraced by the
Illiterate?

CHAP. XIV. A summary of the Code of Nature.


A Brief Sketch of the Life and Writings of M. de Mirabaud





MIRABAUD'S SYSTEM OF NATURE

Translated from the Original BY SAMUEL WILKINSON





     PART II.

     ON THE DIVINITY:--PROOFS OF HIS EXISTENCE:--OF HIS ATTRIBUTES:
     OF HIS INFLUENCE OVER THE HAPPINESS OF MAN.



CHAP. I.

_The Origin of Man's Ideas upon the Divinity._


If man possessed the courage, if he had the requisite industry to recur
to the source of those opinions which are most deeply engraven on his
brain; if he rendered to himself a faithful account of the reasons which
make him hold these opinions as sacred; if he coolly examined the basis
of his hopes, the foundation of his fears, he would find that it very
frequently happens, those objects, or those ideas which move him most
powerfully, either have no real existence, or are words devoid of
meaning, which terror has conjured up to explain some sudden disaster;
that they are often phantoms engendered by a disordered imagination,
modified by ignorance; the effect of an ardent mind distracted by
contending passions, which prevent him from either reasoning justly, or
consulting experience in his judgment; that this mind often labours with
a precipitancy that throws his intellectual faculties into confusion;
that bewilders his ideas; that consequently he gives a substance and a
form to chimeras, to airy nothings, which he afterwards idolizes from
sloth, reverences from prejudice.

A sensible being placed in a nature where every part is in motion, has
various feelings, in consequence of either the agreeable or disagreeable
effects which he is obliged to experience from this continued action and
re-action; in consequence he either finds himself happy or miserable;
according to the quality of the sensations excited in him, he will love
or fear, seek after or fly from, the real or supposed causes of such
marked effects operated on his machine. But if he is ignorant of nature,
if he is destitute of experience, he will frequently deceive himself as
to these causes; for want of either capability or inclination to recur
back to them, he will neither have a true knowledge of their energy, nor
a clear idea of their mode of acting: thus until reiterated experience
shall have formed his ideas, until the mirror of truth shall have shewn
him the judgment he ought to make, he will be involved in trouble, a
prey to incertitude, a victim to credulity.

Man is a being who brings with him nothing into the world save an
aptitude to feeling in a manner more or less lively according to his
individual organization: he has no innate knowledge of any of the causes
that act upon him: by degrees his faculty of feeling discovers to him
their various qualities; he learns to judge of them; time familiarizes
him with their properties; he attaches ideas to them, according to
the manner in which they have affected him; these ideas are correct or
otherwise, in a ratio to the soundness of his organic structure:
his judgment is faulty or not, as these organs are either well or
ill-constituted; in proportion as they are competent to afford him sure
and reiterated experience.

The first moments of man are marked by his wants; that is to say, the
first impulse he receives is to conserve his existence; this he would
not be able to maintain without the concurrence of many analogous
causes: these wants in a sensible being, manifest themselves by a
general languor, a sinking, a confusion in his machine, which gives him
the consciousness of a painful sensation: this derangement subsists, is
even augmented, until the cause suitable to remove it re-establishes
the harmony so necessary to the existence of the human frame. Want,
therefore, is the first evil man experiences; nevertheless it is
requisite to the maintenance of his existence. Was it not for this
derangement of his body, which obliges him to furnish its remedy, he
would not be warned of the necessity of preserving the existence he has
received. Without wants man would be an insensible machine, similar to
a vegetable; like that he would be incapable of preserving himself;
he would not be competent to using the means required to conserve his
being. To his wants are to be ascribed his passions; his desires;
the exercise of his corporeal functions; the play of his intellectual
faculties: they are his wants that oblige him to think; that determine
his will, that induce him to act; it is to satisfy them or rather to
put an end to the painful sensations excited by their presence, that
according to his capacity, to the natural sensibility of his soul,
to the energies which are peculiar to himself, he gives play to his
faculties, exerts the activity of his bodily strength, or displays the
extensive powers of his mind. His wants being perpetual, he is obliged
to labour without relaxation, to procure objects competent to satisfy
them. In a word, it is owing to his multiplied wants that man's energy
is kept in a state of continual activity: as soon as he ceases to
have wants, he falls into inaction--becomes listless--declines into
apathy--sinks into a languor that is incommodious to his feelings or
prejudicial to his existence: this lethargic state of weariness lasts
until new wants, by giving him fresh activity, rouse his dormant
faculties--throw off his stupor--re-animate his vigour, and destroy the
sluggishness to which he had become a prey.

From hence it will be obvious that evil is necessary to man; without it
he would neither be in a condition to know that which injures him; to
avoid its presence; or to seek his own welfare: without this stimulus,
he would differ in nothing from insensible, unorganized beings: if those
evanescent evils which he calls _wants_, did not oblige him to call
forth his faculties, to set his energies in motion, to cull experience,
to compare objects, to discriminate them, to separate those which have
the capabilities to injure him, from those which possess the means
to benefit him, he would be insensible to happiness--inadequate to
enjoyment. In short, _without evil man would be ignorant of good_; he
would be continually exposed to perish like the leaf on a tree. He would
resemble an infant, who, destitute of experience, runs the risque of
meeting his destruction at every step he takes, unguarded by his nurse.
What the nurse is to the child, experience is to the adult; when either
are wanting, these children of different lustres generally go astray:
frequently encounter disaster. Without evil he would be unable to judge
of any thing; he would have no preference; his will would be without
volition, he would be destitute of passions; desire would find no place
in his heart; he would not revolt at the most disgusting objects; he
would not strive to put them away; he would neither have stimuli
to love, nor motives to fear any thing; he would be an insensible
automaton; he would no longer be a man.

If no evil had existed in this world, man would never have dreamt of
those numerous divinities, to whom he has rendered such various modes
of worship. If nature had permitted him easily to satisfy all his
regenerating wants, if she had given him none but agreeable sensations,
his days would have uninterruptedly rolled on in one perpetual
uniformity; he would never have discovered his own nakedness; he would
never have had motives to search after the unknown causes of things--to
meditate in pain. Therefore man, always contented, would only have
occupied himself with satisfying his wants; with enjoying the present,
with feeling the influence of objects, that would unceasingly warn him
of his existence in a mode that he must necessarily approve; nothing
would alarm his heart; every thing would be analogous to his existence:
he would neither know fear, experience distrust, nor have inquietude
for the future: these feelings can only be the consequence of some
troublesome sensation, which must have anteriorly affected him, or which
by disturbing the harmony of his machine, has interrupted the course of
his happiness; which has shewn him he is naked.

Independent of those wants which in man renew themselves every instant;
which he frequently finds it impossible to satisfy; every individual
experiences a multiplicity of evils--he suffers from the inclemency
of the seasons--he pines in penury--he is infected with plague--he
is scourged by war--he is the victim of famine--he is afflicted with
disease--he is the sport of a thousand accidents, &c. This is the reason
why all men are fearful; why the whole human race are diffident. The
knowledge he has of pain alarms him upon all unknown causes, that is to
say, upon all those of which he has not yet experienced the effect; this
experience made with precipitation, or if it be preferred, by instinct,
places him on his guard against all those objects from the operation of
which he is ignorant what consequences may result to himself.

His inquietude is in proportion; his fears keep pace with the extent of
the disorder which these objects produce in him; they are measured by
their rarity, that is to say, by the inexperience he has of them; by the
natural sensibility of the soul; and by the ardour of his imagination.
The wore ignorant man is, the less experience he has, the more he is
susceptible of fear; solitude, the obscurity of a forest, silence, and
the darkness of night, desolate ruins, the roaring of the wind, sudden,
confused noises, are objects of terror to all who are unaccustomed to
these things. The uninformed man is a child whom every thing astonishes;
who trembles at every thing he encounters: his alarms disappear, his
fears diminish, his mind becomes calm, in proportion as experience
familiarizes him, more or less, with natural effects; his fears cease
entirely, as soon as he understands, or believes he understands, the
causes that act; or when he knows how to avoid their effects. But if he
cannot penetrate the causes which disturb him, if he cannot discover the
agents by whom he suffers, if he cannot find to what account to place
the confusion he experiences, his inquietude augments; his fears
redouble; his imagination leads him astray; it exaggerates his evil;
paints in a disorderly manner these unknown objects of his terror;
magnifies their powers; then making an analogy between them and those
terrific objects, with whom he is already acquainted, he suggests
to himself the means he usually takes to mitigate their anger; to
conciliate their kindness; he employs similar measures to soften the
anger, to disarm the power, to avert the effects of the concealed cause
which gives birth to his inquietudes, which fills him with anxiety,
which alarms his fears. It is thus his weakness, aided by ignorance,
renders him superstitious.

There are very few men, even in our own day, who have sufficiently
studied nature, who are fully apprised of physical causes, or with the
effects they must necessarily produce. This ignorance, without doubt,
was much greater in the more remote ages of the world, when the human
mind, yet in its infancy, had not collected that experience, taken that
expansion, made those strides towards improvement, which distinguishes
the present from the past. Savages dispersed, erratic, thinly scattered
up and down, knew the course of nature either very imperfectly or not
at all; society alone perfects human knowledge: it requires not only
multiplied but combined efforts to unravel the secrets of nature. This
granted, all natural causes were mysteries to our wandering ancestors;
the entire of nature was an enigma to them; all its phenomena was
marvellous, every event inspired terror to beings who were destitute
of experience; almost every thing, they saw must have appeared to them
strange, unusual, contrary to their idea of the order of things.

It cannot then furnish matter for surprise, if we behold men in the
present day trembling at the sight of those objects which have formerly
filled their fathers with dismay. _Eclipse, comets, meteors_, were, in
ancient days, subjects of alarm to all the people of the earth: these
effects, so natural in the eyes of the sound philosopher, who has by
degrees fathomed their true causes, have yet the right, possess the
power, to alarm the most numerous, to excite the fears of the least
instructed part of modern nations. The people of the present day, as
well as their ignorant ancestors, find something marvellous, believe
there is a supernatural agency in all those objects to which their eyes
are unaccustomed; they consider all those unknown causes as wonderful,
that act with a force of which their mind has no idea it is possible
the known agents are capable. The ignorant see wonders _prodigies,
miracles_, in all those striking effects of which they are unable to
render themselves a satisfactory account; all the causes which produce
them they think _supernatural_; this, however, really implies nothing
more than that they are not familiar to them, or that they have not
hitherto witnessed natural agents, whose energy was equal to the
production of effects so rare, so astonishing, as those with which their
sight has been appalled.

Besides the ordinary phenomena to which nations were witnesses without
being competent to unravel the causes, they have in times very remote
from ours, experienced calamities, whether general or local, which
filled them with the most cruel inquietude; which plunged them into an
abyss of consternation. The traditions of all people, the annals of all
nations, recal, even at this day, melancholy events, physical disasters,
dreadful catastrophes, which had the effect of spreading universal
terror among our forefathers, But when history should be silent on these
stupendous revolutions, would not our own reflection on what passes
under our eyes be sufficient to convince us, that all parts of our globe
have been, and following the course of things, will necessarily be
again violently agitated, overturned, changed, overflowed, in a state of
conflagration? Vast continents have been inundated, seas breaking their
limits have usurped the dominion of the earth; at length retiring,
these waters have left striking, proofs of their presence, by the marine
vestiges of shells, skeletons of sea fish, &c. which the attentive
observer meets with at every step, in the bowels of those fertile
countries we now inhabit--subterraneous fires have opened to themselves
the most frightful volcanoes, whose craters frequently issue destruction
on every side. In short, the elements unloosed, have at various times,
disputed among themselves the empire of our globe; this exhibits
evidence of the fact, by those vast heaps of wreck, those stupendous
ruins spread over its surface. What, then, must have been the fears of
mankind, who in those countries believed he beheld the entire of nature
armed against his peace, menacing with destruction his very abode? What
must have been the inquietude of a people taken thus unprovided, who
fancied they saw nature cruelly labouring to their annihilation? Who
beheld a world ready to be dashed into atoms; who witnessed the earth
suddenly rent asunder; whose yawning chasm was the grave of large
cities, whole provinces, entire nations? What ideas must mortals, thus
overwhelmed with terror, form to themselves of the irresistible cause
that could produce such extended effects? Without doubt they did not
attribute these wide spreading calamities to nature; neither did they
conceive they were mere physical causes; they could not suspect she was
the author, the accomplice of the confusion she herself experienced;
they did not see that these tremendous revolutions, these overpowering
disorders, were the necessary result of her immutable laws; that they
contributed to the general order by which she subsists; that, in point
of fact, there was nothing more surprising in the inundation of large
portions of the earth, in the swallowing up an entire nation, in a
volcanic conflagration spreading destruction over whole provinces, than
there is in a stone falling to the earth, or the death of a fly; that
each equally has its spring in the necessity of things.

It was under these astounding circumstances, that nations, bathed in
the most bitter tears, perplexed with the most frightful visions,
electrified with terror, not believing there existed on this mundane
ball, causes sufficiently powerful to operate the gigantic phenomena
that filled their minds with dismay, carried their streaming eyes
towards heaven, where their tremulous fears led them to suppose these
unknown agents, whose unprovoked enmity destroyed, their earthly
felicity, could alone reside.

It was in the lap of ignorance, in the season of alarm, in the bosom of
calamity, that mankind ever formed his first notions of the _Divinity_.
From hence it is obvious that his ideas on this subject are to be
suspected, that his notions are in a great measure false, that they are
always afflicting. Indeed, upon whatever part of our sphere we cast
our eyes, whether it be upon the frozen climates of the north, upon the
parching regions of the south, or under the more temperate zones, we
every where behold the people when assailed by misfortunes, have either
made to themselves national gods, or else have adopted those which have
been given them by their conquerors; before these beings, either
of their own creation or adoption, they have tremblingly prostrated
themselves in the hour of calamity, soliciting relief; have ignorantly
attributed to blocks of stone, or to men like themselves, those natural
effects which were above their comprehension; the inhabitants of many
nations, not contented with the national gods, made each to himself
one or more gods, which he supposed presided exclusively over his own
household, from whom he supposed he derived his own peculiar happiness,
to whom he attributed all his domestic misfortunes. The idea of these
powerful agents, these supposed distributors of good and evil, was
always associated with that of terror; their name was never pronounced
without recalling to man's wind either his own particular calamities or
those of his fathers. In many places man trembles at this day, because
his progenitors have trembled for thousands of years past. The thought
of his gods always awakened in man the most afflicting ideas. If he
recurred to the source of his actual fears, to the commencement of those
melancholy impressions that stamp themselves in his mind when their
name is announced, he would find it in the conflagrations, in the
revolutions, in those extended disasters, that have at various times
destroyed large portions of the human race; that overwhelmed with dismay
those miserable beings who escaped the destruction of the earth; these
in transmitting to posterity, the tradition of such afflicting events,
have also transmitted to him their fears; have delivered down to their
successors, those gloomy ideas which their bewildered imaginations,
coupled with their barbarous ignorance of natural causes, had formed to
them of the anger of their irritated gods, to which their alarm falsely
attributed these sweeping disasters.

If the gods of nations had their birth in the bosom of alarm, it was
again in that of despair that each individual formed the unknown power
that he made exclusively for himself. Ignorant of physical causes,
unpractised in their mode of action, unaccustomed to their effects,
whenever he experienced any serious misfortune, whenever he was
afflicted with any grievous sensation, he was at a loss how to account
for it; he therefore attributed it to his household gods, to whom he
made an immediate supplication for assistance, or rather for forbearance
of further affliction: this disposition in man has been finely
pourtrayed by Aesop in his fable of "the Waggoner and Hercules." The
motion which in despight of himself was excited in his machine, his
diseases, his troubles, his passions, his inquietude, the painful
alterations his frame underwent, without his being able to fathom the
true causes; at length death, of which the aspect in so formidable to a
being strongly attached to existence, were effects he looked upon either
as supernatural, or else he conceived they were repugnant to his actual
nature; he attributed them to some mighty cause, which maugre all his
efforts, disposed of him at each, moment. Thus palsied with alarm,
benumbed with terror, he pensively meditated upon his sorrows; agitated
with fear, he sought for means to avert the calamities that threatened
him with destruction; his imagination, thus rendered desperate by
his endurance of evils which he found inevitable, formed to him
those phantoms which he called gods; before whom he trembled from a
consciousness of his own weakness; thus disposed, he endeavoured by
prostration, by sacrifices, by prayers, to disarm the anger of these
imaginary beings to which his trepidation had given birth; whom he
ignorantly imagined to be the cause of his misery, whom his fancy
painted to him as endowed with the power of alleviating his sufferings:
it was thus in the extremity of his grief, in the exacerbation of his
mind, weighed down with misfortune, that unhappy man fashioned
those chimeras which filled him with the most gloomy ideas, which he
transmitted to his posterity, as the surest means of avoiding the evils
to which he had been himself subjected.

Man never judges of those objects of which he is ignorant, but through
the medium of those which come within his knowledge: thus man, taking
himself for the model, ascribed will, intelligence, design, projects,
passions; in a word, qualities analogous to his own, to all those
unknown causes of which he experienced the action. As soon as a visible
or supposed cause affects him in an agreeable manner, or in a mode
favourable to his existence, he concludes it to be good, to be well
intentioned towards him: on the contrary, he judges all those to be bad
in their nature, evilly disposed, to have the intention of injuring him,
which cause him any painful sensations. He attributes views, plans,
a system of conduct like his own, to every thing which to his limited
ideas appears of itself to produce connected effects; to act with
regularity; to constantly operate in the same manner; that uniformly
produces the same sensations in his own person. According to these
notions, which he always borrows from himself, from his own peculiar
mode of action, he either loves or fears those objects which have
affected him; he in consequence approaches them with confidence or
timidity; seeks after them or flies from them in proportion as the
feelings they have excited are either pleasant or painful. Having
travelled thus far, he presently addresses them; he invokes their aid;
prays to them for succour; conjures them to cease his afflictions;
to forbear tormenting him; as he finds himself sensible to presents,
pleased with submission, he tries to win them to his interests by
humiliation, by sacrifices; he exercises towards them the hospitality
he himself loves; he gives them an asylum; he builds them a dwelling;
he furnishes them with costly raiment; he makes their altars smoke with
delicious food; he proffers to their acceptance the earliest flowers of
spring; the finest fruits of autumn; the rich grain of summer; in short
he sets before them all those things which he thinks will please them
the most, because he himself places the highest value on them. These
dispositions enable us to account for the formation of tutelary gods,
of lares, of larvae, which every man makes to himself in savage and
unpolished nations. Thus we perceive that weak superstitious mortals,
ignorant of truth, devoid of experience, regard as the arbiters of their
fate, as the dispensers of good and evil, animals, stones, unformed
inanimate substances, which the effort of their heated imaginations
transform into gods, whom they invest with intelligence, whom they
clothe with desires, to whom they give volition.

Another disposition which serves to deceive the savage man, which will
equally deceive those whom reason shall not enlighten on these subjects,
is his attachment to omens; or the fortuitous concurrence of certain
effects, with causes which have not produced them; the co-existence
of these effects with certain causes, which have not the slightest
connection with them, has frequently led astray very intelligent beings;
nations who considered themselves very enlightened; who have either been
disinclined or unable to disentangle the one from the other: thus the
savage attributes bounty or the will to render him service, to any
object whether animate or inanimate, such as a stone of a certain form,
a rock, a mountain, a tree, a serpent, an owl, &c. if every time he
encounters these objects in a certain position, it should so happen that
he is more than ordinarily successful in hunting, that he should take an
unusual quantity of fish, that he should be victorious in war, or that
he should compass any enterprize whatever that he may at that moment
undertake: the same savage will be quite as gratuitous in attaching
malice, wickedness, the determination to injure him, to either the same
object in a different position, or any others in a given posture, which
way have met his eyes on those days when he shall have suffered some
grievous accident, have been very unsuccessful in his undertakings,
unfortunate in the chace, disappointed in his draught of fish: incapable
of reasoning he connects these effects with causes, that reflection
would convince him have nothing in common with each other; that are
entirely due to physical causes, to necessary circumstances, over which
neither himself nor his omens have the least controul: nevertheless he
finds it much easier to attribute them to these imaginary causes; he
therefore _deifies_ them; looks upon them as either his guardian angels,
or else as his most inveterate enemies. Having invested them with
supernatural powers, he becomes anxious to explain to himself their mode
of action; his self-love prevents his seeking elsewhere for the model:
thus he assigns them all those motives that actuate himself; he endows
them with passions; he gives them design--intelligence--will--imagines
they can either injure him or benefit him, as he may render them
propitious or otherwise to his views: he ends with worshipping them;
with paying them divine honours; he appoints them priests; or at least
always consults them before he undertakes any object of moment: such
is their influence, that if they put on the evil position, he will lay
aside the most important undertaking. The savage in this is never more
than an infant, that is angry with the object that displeases him; just
like the dog who gnaws the stone by which he has been wounded, without
recurring to the hand by which it was thrown.

Such is the foundation of man's faith, in either happy or unhappy omens:
devoid of experience, unaccustomed to reason with precision, fearing
to call in the evidence of truth, he looks upon them either as gods
themselves, or else as warnings given him by his other gods, to whom
he attributes the faculties of sagacity and foresight, of which he is
himself miserably deficient. Ignorance, when involved in disaster, when
immersed in trouble, believes a stone, a reptile, a bird, much better
instructed than himself. The slender observation of the ignorant only
serves to render him more superstitious; he sees certain birds announce
by their flight, by their cries, certain changes in the weather, such as
cold, heat, rain, storms; he beholds at certain periods, vapours arise
from the bottom of some particular caverns? there needs nothing further
to impress upon him the belief, that these beings possess the knowledge
of future events; enjoy the gifts of prophecy: he looks upon them as
supernatural agents, employed by his gods: it is thus he becomes the
dupe to his own credulity.

If by degrees the truth flashing occasionally on his mind, experience
and reflection arrive at undeceiving him, with respect to the power,
the intelligence, the virtues actually residing in these objects; he at
least supposes them put in activity by some secret, some hidden cause;
that they are the instruments, employed by some invisible agent, who
is either friendly or inimical to his welfare. To this concealed
agent, therefore, he addresses himself; pays him his vows; emplores
his assistance; deprecates his wrath; seeks to propitiate him to his
interests; is willing to soften his anger; for this purpose he employs
the same means, of which he avails himself, either to appease or gain
over the beings of his own species.

Societies in their origin, seeing themselves frequently afflicted
by nature, supposed either the elements, or the concealed powers who
regulated them, possessed a will, views, wants, desires, similar to
their own. From hence, the sacrifices imagined to nourish them; the
libations poured out to them; the steams, the incense to gratify their
olfactory nerves. Their superstition led them to believe these elements
or their irritated movers were to be appeased like irritated man, by
prayers, by humiliation, by presents. Their imagination was ransacked
to discover the presents that would be most acceptable in their eyes;
to ascertain the oblations that would be most agreeable, the sacrifices
that would most surely propitiate their kindness: as these did not make
known their inclinations, man differed with his fellow on those most
suitable; each followed his own disposition; or rather each offered what
was most estimable in his own eyes; hence arose differences never to be
reconciled the bitterest animosities; the most unconquerable aversions;
the most, destructive jealousies! Thus some brought the fruits of the
earth, others offered sheaves of corn: some strewed flowers over their
fanes; some decorated them with the most costly jewels; some served them
with meats; others sacrificed lambs, heifers, bulls; at length such
was their delirium, such the wildness of their imaginations, that they
stained their altars with human gore, made oblations of young children
immolated virgins, to appease the anger of these supposed deities.

The old men, as having the most experience, were usually charged with
the conduct of these peace-offerings, from whence, the name PRIEST;
[Greek letters], _presbos_, in the Greek meaning an old man. These
accompanied them with ceremonies, instituted rites, used precautions by
consulting omens; adopted formalities, retraced to their fellow citizens
the notions transmitted to them by their forefathers; collected the
observations made by their ancestors; repeated the fables they had
received; added commentaries of their own; subjoined supplications
to the idols at whose shrine they were sacrificing. It is thus
the sacerdotal order was established; thus that public worship was
established; by degrees each community formed a body of tenets to be
observed by the citizens; these were transmitted from race to race;
held sacred out of reverence for their fathers; at length it was deemed
sacrilege to doubt these pandects in any one particular; even the
errors, that had crept into them with time, were beheld with reverential
awe; he that ventured to reason upon them, was looked upon as an enemy
to the commonwealth; as one whose impiety drew down upon them the
vengeance of these adored beings, to which alone imagination had given
birth; not contented with adopting the rituals, with following the
ceremonies invented by themselves, one community waged war against
another, to oblige it to receive their particular creeds; which the old
men who regulated them, declared would infallibly win them the favor of
their tutelary deities: thus very often to conciliate their favor, the
victorious party immolated on the altars of their gods, the bodies of
their unhappy captives; frequently they carried their savage barbarity
the length of exterminating whole nations, who happened to worship gods
different from their own: thus it frequently happened, that the friends
of the serpent, when victorious, covered his altars with the mangled
carcases of the worshippers of the stone, whom the fortune of war had
placed in their hands: such were the unformed, the precarious elements
of which rude nations every where availed themselves to compose
their superstitions: they were always a system of conduct invented by
imagination: conceived in ignorance, organized in misfortune, to render
the unknown powers, to whom they believed nature was submitted, either
favorable to their views, or to, induce them to cease those afflictions,
which natural causes, for the wisest purposes, were continually heaping
upon them; thus some irascible, at the same time placable being, was
always chosen for the basis of the adopted superstition; it was upon
these puerile tenets, upon these absurd notions, that the old men or the
priests rested their doctrines; founded their rights; established their
authority: it was to render these fanciful beings friendly to the race
of man, that they erected, temples, raised altars, loaded them with
wealth; in short, it was from such rude foundations, that arose the
magnificent structure of superstition; under which man trembled for
thousands of years: which governed the condition of society, which
determined the actions of the people, gave the tone to the character,
deluged the earth with blood, for such a long series of ages. But
although these superstitions were originally invented by savages, they
still have the power of regulating the fate of many civilized
nations, who are not less tenacious of their chimeras, than their rude
progenitors. These systems, so ruinous in their principles, have been
variously modified by the human mind, of which it is the essence, to
labour incessantly on unknown objects; it always, commences by attaching
to these, a very first-rate importance, which it afterwards never dares
coolly to examine.

Such was the course of man's imagination, in the successive ideas which
he either formed to himself, or which he received from his fathers, upon
the divinity. The first theology of man was grounded on fear, modelled
by ignorance: either afflicted or benefitted by the elements, he adored
these elements themselves; by a parity of reasoning, if reasoning it can
be called, he extended his reverence to every material, coarse object;
he afterwards rendered his homage to the agents he supposed presiding
over these elements; to powerful genii; to inferior genii; to heroes;
to men endowed with either great or striking qualities. Time, aided by
reflection, with here and there a slight corruscation of truth, induced
him in some places to relinquish his original ideas; he believed
he simplified the thing by lessening the number of his gods, but he
achieved nothing by this towards attaining to the truth; in recurring
from cause to cause man finished by losing sight of every thing; in this
obscurity, in this dark abyss, his mind still laboured, he formed
new chimeras, he made new gods, or rather he formed a very complex
machinery; still, as before, whenever he could not account for any
phenomenon that struck his sight, he was unwilling to ascribe it to
physical causes; and the name of his Divinity, whatever that might
happen to be, was always brought in to supply his own ignorance of
natural causes.

If a faithful account was rendered of man's ideas upon the Divinity, he
would be obliged to acknowledge, that for the most part the word _Gods_
has been used to express the concealed, remote, unknown causes of the
effects he witnessed; that he applies this term when the spring of
natural, the source of known causes ceases to be visible: as soon as he
loses the thread of these causes, or as soon as his mind can no longer
follow the chain, he solves the difficulty, terminates his research, by
ascribing it to his gods; thus giving a vague definition to an unknown
cause, at which either his idleness, or his limited knowledge, obliges
him to stop. When, therefore, he ascribes to his gods the production
of some phenomenon, the novelty or the extent of which strikes him with
wonder, but of which his ignorance precludes him from unravelling the
true cause, or which he believes the natural powers with which he is
acquainted are inadequate to bring forth; does he, in fact, do any thing
more than substitute for the darkness of his own mind, a sound to which
he has been accustomed to listen with reverential awe? Ignorance may be
said to be the inheritance of the generality of men; these attribute to
their gods not only those uncommon effects that burst upon their senses
with an astounding force, but also the most simple events, the causes
of which are the most easy to be known to whoever shall be willing to
meditate upon them. In short, man has always respected those unknown
causes, those surprising effects which his ignorance prevented him from
fathoming.

But does this afford us one single, correct idea of the _Divinity_? Can
it be possible we are acting rationally, thus eternally to make him
the agent of our stupidity, of our sloth, of our want of information on
natural causes? Do we, in fact, pay any kind of adoration to this being,
by thus bringing him forth on every trifling occasion, to solve the
difficulties ignorance throws in our way? Of whatever nature this great
cause of causes may be, it is evident to the slightest reflection that
he has been sedulous to conceal himself from our view; that he has
rendered it impossible for us to have the least acquaintance with
him, except through the medium of nature, which he has unquestionably
rendered competent to every thing: this is the rich banquet spread
before man; he is invited to partake, with a welcome he has no right to
dispute; to enjoy therefore is to obey; to be happy is to render that
worship which must make him most acceptable; _to be happy himself is
to make others happy; to make others happy is to be virtuous; to be
virtuous he must revere truth: to know what truth is, he must examine
with caution, scrutinize with severity, every opinion he adopts:_ this
granted, is it at all consistent with the majesty of the Divinity, is it
not insulting to such a being to clothe him with our wayward passions;
to ascribe to him designs similar to our narrow view of things; to
give him our filthy desires; to suppose he can be guided by our finite
conceptions; to bring him on a level with frail humanity, by investing
him with our qualities, however much we may exaggerate them; to indulge
an opinion that he can either act or think as we do; to imagine he can
in any manner resemble such a feeble play-thing, as is the greatest, the
most distinguished man? No! it is to degrade him in the eye of reason;
to violate every regard for truth; to set moral decency at defiance; to
fall back into the depth of cimmerian darkness. Let man therefore sit
down cheerfully to the feast; let him contentedly partake of what he
finds; but let him not worry the Divinity with his useless prayers, with
his shallow-sighted requests, to solicit at his hands that which, if
granted, would in all probability be the most injurious for himself;
these supplications are, in fact, at once to say, that with our limited
experience, with our slender knowledge, we better understand what is
suitable to our condition, what is convenient to our welfare, than the
mighty _Cause of all causes_ who has left us in the hands of nature:
it is to be presumptuous in the highest degree of presumption; it is
impiously to endeavour to lift up a veil which it is evidently forbidden
man to touch; that even his most strenuous efforts attempt in vain.

It remains, then, to inquire, if man can reasonably flatter himself with
obtaining a perfect knowledge of the power of nature; of the properties
of the beings she contains; of the effects which may result from their
various combinations? Do we know why the magnet attracts iron? Are
we better acquainted with the cause of polar attraction? Are we in a
condition to explain the phenomena of light, electricity, elasticity?
Do we understand the mechanism by which that modification of our brain,
which we tall volition, puts our arm or our legs into motion? Can we
render to ourselves an account of the manner in which our eyes behold
objects, in which our ears receive sounds, in which our mind conceives
ideas? All we know upon these subjects is, that they are so. If then
we are incapable of accounting for the most ordinary phenomena, which
nature daily exhibits to us, by what chain of reasoning do we refuse to
her the power of producing other effects equally incomprehensible to
us? Shall we be more instructed, when every time we behold an effect of
which we are not in a capacity to develope the cause, we may idly say,
this effect is produced by the power, by the will of God? Undoubtedly it
is the great _Cause of causes_ must have produced every thing; but is
it not lessening the true dignity of the Divinity, to introduce him as
interfering in every operation of nature; nay, in every action of so
insignificant a creature as man? As a mere agent executing his own
eternal, immutable laws; when experience, when reflection, when the
evidence of all we contemplate, warrants the idea, that this ineffable
being has rendered nature competent to every effect, by giving her those
irrevocable laws, that eternal, unchangeable system, according to which
all the beings she contains must eternally act? Is it not more worthy
the exalted mind of the GREAT PARENT OF PARENTS, _ens entium_, more
consistent with truth, to suppose that his wisdom in giving these
immutable, these eternal laws to the macrocosm, foresaw every thing that
could possibly be requisite for the happiness of the beings contained in
it; that therefore he left it to the invariable operation of a system,
which never can produce any effect that is not the best possible that
circumstances however viewed will admit: that consequently the natural
activity of the human mind, which is itself the result of this eternal
action, was purposely given to man, that he might endeavour to
fathom, that he might strive to unravel, that he might seek out the
concatenation of these laws, in order to furnish remedies against the
evils produced by ignorance. How many discoveries in the great science
of natural philosophy has mankind progressively made, which the ignorant
prejudices of our forefathers on their first announcement considered
as impious, as displeasing to the Divinity, as heretical profanations,
which could only be expiated by the sacrifice of the enquiring
individuals; to whose labour their posterity owes such an infinity of
gratitude? Even in modern days we have seen a SOCRATES destroyed, a
GALLILEO condemned, whilst multitudes of other benefactors to mankind
have been held in contempt by their uninformed cotemporaries, for those
very researches into nature which the present generation hold in the
highest veneration. _Whenever ignorant priests are permitted to guide
the opinions of nations, science can make but a very slender progress:_
natural discoveries will be always held inimical to the interest of
bigotted superstitious men. It may, to the minds of infatuated mortals,
to the shallow comprehension of prejudiced beings, appear very pious to
reply on every occasion our gods do this, our gods do that; but to the
contemplative philosopher, to the man of reason, to the real adorers of
the great _Cause of causes_, it will never be convincing, that a sound,
a mere word, can attach the reason of things; can have more than a fixed
sense; can suffice to explain problems. The word GOD is for the most
part used to denote the impenetrable cause of those effects which
astonish mankind; which man is not competent to explain. But is not this
wilful idleness? Is it not inconsistent with our nature? Is it not being
truly impious, to sit down with those fine faculties we have received,
and give the answer of a child to every thing we do not understand; or
rather which our own sloth, or our own want of industry has prevented us
from knowing? Ought we not rather to redouble our efforts to penetrate
the cause of those phenomena which strike our mind? Is not this, in
fact, the duty we owe to the great, the universal Parent? When we have
given this answer, what have we said? nothing but what every one knows.
Could the great _Cause of causes_ make the whole, without also making
its part? But does it of necessity follow that he executes every
trifling operation, when he has so noble an agent as his own nature,
whose laws he has rendered unchangeable, whose scale of operations can
never deviate from the eternal routine he has marked out for her and all
the beings she embraces? Whose secrets, if sought out, contain the true
balsam of life--the sovereign remedy for all the diseases of man.

When we shall be ingenuous with ourselves, we shall be obliged to
agree that it was uniformly the ignorance in which our ancestors were
involved, their want of knowledge of natural causes, their unenlightened
ideas on the powers of nature, which gave birth to the gods they
worshipped; that it is, again, the impossibility which the greater
part of mankind find to withdraw, themselves out of this ignorance, the
difficulty they consequently find to form to themselves simple ideas
of the formation of things, the labour that is required to discover the
true sources of those events, which they either admire or fear, that
makes them believe these ideas are necessary to enable them to render an
account of those phenomena, to which their own sluggishness renders them
incompetent to recur. Here, without doubt, is the reason they treat all
those as irrational who do not see the necessity of admitting an unknown
agent, or some secret energy, which for want of being acquainted with
Nature, they have placed out of herself.

The phenomena of nature necessarily breed various sentiments in man:
some he thinks favorable to him, some prejudicial, while the whole
is only what it can be. Some excite his love, his admiration, his
gratitude; others fill him with trouble, cause aversion, drive him to
despair. According to the various sensations he experiences, he either
loves or fears the causes to which he attributes the effects,
which produce in him these different passions: these sentiments
are commensurate with the effects he experiences; his admiration is
enhanced, his fears are augmented, in the same ratio as the phenomena
which strikes his senses are more or less extensive, more or less
irresistible or interesting to him. Man necessarily makes himself the
centre of nature; indeed he can only judge of things, as he is himself
affected by them; he can only love that which he thinks favorable to
his being; he hates, he fears every thing which causes him to suffer:
in short, as we have seen in the former volume, he calls confusion every
thing that deranges the economy of his machine; he believes all is in
order, as soon as he experiences nothing but what is suitable to his
peculiar mode of existence. By a necessary consequence of these ideas,
man firmly believes that the entire of nature was made for him alone;
that it was only himself which she had in view in all her works; or
rather that the powerful cause to which this nature was subordinate, had
only for object man and his convenience, in all the stupendous effects
which are produced in the universe.

If there existed on this earth other thinking beings besides man,
they would fall exactly into similar prejudices with himself; it is
a sentiment founded upon that predilection which each individual
necessarily has for himself; a predilection that will subsist until
reason, aided by experience, in pointing out the truth, shall have
rectified his errors.

Thus, whenever man is contented, whenever every thing is in order with
respect to himself, he either admires or loves the causes to which he
believes he is indebted for his welfare; when he becomes discontented
with his mode of existence, he either fears or hates the cause which
he supposes has produced these afflicting effects. But his welfare
confounds itself with his existence; it ceases to make itself felt when
it has become habitual, when it has been of long continuance; he then
thinks it is inherrent to his essence; he concludes from it that he is
formed to be always happy; he finds it natural that every thing should
concur to the maintenance of his being. It is by no means the same when
he experiences a mode of existence that is displeasing to himself: the
man who suffers is quite astonished at the change which his taken place
in his machine; he judges it to be contrary to the entire of nature,
because it is incommodious to his own particular nature; he, imagines
those events by which he is wounded, to be contrary to the order of
things; he believes that nature is deranged every time she does not
procure for him that mode of feeling which is suitable to his ideas: he
concludes from these suppositions that nature, or rather that the agent
who moves her; is irritated against him.

It is thus that man, almost insensible to good, feels evil in a very
lively manner; the first he believes natural, the other he thinks
opposed to nature. He is either ignorant, or forgets, that he
constitutes part of a whole, formed by the assemblage of substances, of
which some are analogous, others heterogeneous; that the various beings
of which nature is composed, are endowed with a variety of properties,
by virtue of which they act diversely on the bodies who find themselves
within the sphere of their action; that some have an aptitude to
attraction, whilst it is of the essence of others to repel; that even
those bodies that attract at one distance, repel at another; that
the peculiar attractions and repulsions of the particles of bodies
perpetually oppose, invariably counteract the general ones of the masses
of matter: he does not perceive that these beings, as destitute of
goodness, as devoid of malice, act only according to their respective
essences; follow the laws their properties impose upon them; without
being in capacity to act otherwise than they do. It is, therefore, for
want of being acquainted with these things, that he looks upon the great
Author of nature, the great _Cause of causes_, as the immediate cause of
those evils to which he is submitted; that he judges erroneously when he
imagines that the Divinity is exasperated against him.

The fact is, man believes that his welfare is a debt due to him from
nature; that when he suffers evil she does him an injustice; fully
persuaded that this nature was made solely for himself, he cannot
conceive she would make him, who is her lord paramount, suffer, if she
was not moved thereto by a power who is inimical to his happiness;
who has reasons with which he is unacquainted for afflicting, who has
motives which he wishes to discover, for punishing him. From hence it
will be obvious, that evil, much more than good, is the true motive of
those researches which man has made concerning the Divinity--of those
ideas which he has formed to himself--of the conduct he has held towards
him. The admiration of the works of nature, or the acknowledgement of
its goodness, seem never alone to have determined the human species to
recur painfully by thought to the source of these things; familiarized
at once with all those effects which are favourable to his existence, he
does not by any means give himself the same trouble to seek the causes,
that he does to discover those which disquiet him, or by which he is
afflicted. Thus, in reflecting upon the Divinity, it was generally
upon the cause of his evils that man meditated; his meditations were
fruitless, because the evil he experiences, as well as the good he
partakes, are equally necessary effects of natural causes, to which
his mind ought rather to have bent its force, than to have invented
fictitious causes of which he never could form to himself any but
false ideas; seeing that he always borrowed them, from his own peculiar
mariner of existing, acting, and feeling. Obstinately refusing to see
any thing, but himself, he never became acquainted with that universal
nature of which he constitutes such a very feeble part.

The slightest reflection, however, would have been sufficient to
undeceive him on these erroneous ideas. Everything tends to prove that
good and evil are modes of existence that depend upon causes by which a
man is moved; that a sensible being is obliged to experience them. In
a nature composed of a multitude of beings infinitely varied, the
shock occasioned by the collision of discordant matter must necessarily
disturb the order, derange the mode of existence of those beings who
have no analogy with them: these act in every thing they do after
certain laws, which are in themselves immutable; the good or evil,
therefore, which man experiences, are necessary consequences of the
qualities inherent to the beings, within whose sphere of action he is
found. Our birth, which we call a benefit, is an effect as necessary as
our death, which we contemplate as an injustice of fate: it is of the
nature of all analogous beings to unite themselves to form a whole: it
is of the nature of all compound beings to be destroyed, or to dissolve
themselves; some maintain their union for a longer period than others;
some disperse very quickly, as the ephemeron; some endure for ages, as
the planets; every being in dissolving itself gives birth to new beings;
these are destroyed in their turn; to execute the eternal, the immutable
laws of a nature that only exists by the continual changes that all
its parts undergo. Thus nature cannot be accused of malice, since every
thing that takes place in it is necessary--is produced by an invariable
system, to which every other being, as well as herself, is eternally
subjected. The same igneous matter that in man is the principle of
life, frequently becomes the principle of his destruction, either by the
conflagration of a city, the explosion of a volcano, or his mad passion
for war. The aqueous fluid that circulates through his machine, so
essentially necessary to his actual existence, frequently becomes too
abundant, and terminates him by suffocation; is the cause of those
inundations which sometimes swallow up both the earth and its
inhabitants. The air, without which he is not able to respire, is the
cause of those hurricanes, of those tempests, which frequently render
useless the labour of mortals. These elements are obliged to burst their
bonds, when they are combined in a certain manner; their necessary but
fatal consequences are those ravages, those contagions, those famines,
those diseases, those various scourges, against which man, with
streaming eyes and violent emotions, vainly implores the aid of those
powers who are deaf to his cries: his prayers are never granted; but
the same necessity which afflicted him, the same immutable laws which
overwhelmed him with trouble, replaces things in the order he finds
suitable to his species: a relative order of things which was, is, and
always will be the only standard of his judgment.

Man, however, made no such simple reflections: he either did not or
would not perceive that every thing in nature acted by invariable
laws; he continued stedfast in contemplating the good of which he was
partaker, as a favor; in considering the evil he experienced, as a sign
of anger in this nature, which he supposed to be animated by the same
passions as himself or at least that it was governed by secret agents,
who acted after his own manner, who obliged it to execute their will,
that was sometimes favourable, sometimes inimical to the human species.
It was to these supposed agents, with whom in the sunshine of his
prosperity he was but little occupied, that in the bosom of his calamity
he addressed his prayers; he thanked them, however, for their favours,
fearing lest their ingratitude might farther provoke their fury: thus
when assailed by disaster, when afflicted with disease, he invoked them
with fervor: he required them to change in his favor the mode of acting
which was the very essence of beings; he was willing that to make the
slightest evil he experienced cease, that the eternal chain of things
might be broken; and the unerring, undeviating course of nature might he
arrested.

It was upon such ridiculous pretensions, that were founded those
supplications, those fervent prayers, which mortals, almost always
discontented with their fate, never in accord in their respective
desires, addressed to their gods. They were unceasingly upon their knees
before the altars, were ever prostrate before the power of the beings,
whom they judged had the right of commanding nature; who they supposed
to have sufficient energy to divert her course; who they considered to
possess the means to make her subservient to their particular views;
thus each hoped by presents, by humiliation, to induce them to oblige
this nature, to satisfy the discordant desires of their race. The sick
man, expiring in his bed, asks that the humours accumulated in his body
should in an instant lose those properties which renders them injurious
to his existence; that by an act of their puissance, his gods should
renew or recreate the springs of a machine worn out by infirmities. The
cultivator of a low swampy country, makes complaint of the abundance of
rain with which his fields are inundated; whilst the inhabitant of
the hill, raises his thanks for the favors he receives, solicits a
continuance of that which causes the despair of his neighbour. In this,
each is willing to have a god for himself, and asks according to his
momentary caprices, to his fluctuating wants, that the invariable
essence of things, should be continually changed in his favour.

From this it must be obvious, that man every moment asks a _miracle_ to
be wrought in his support. It is not, therefore, at all surprising that
he displayed such ready credulity, that he adopted with such facility
the relation of the marvellous deeds which were universally announced to
him as the acts of the power, or the effects of the benevolence, of
the various gods which presided over the nations of the earth: these
wonderful tales, which were offered to his acceptance, as the most
indubitable proofs of the empire of these gods over nature, which man
always found deaf to his entreaties, were readily accredited by him; in
the expectation, that if he could gain them over to his interest, this
nature, which he found so sullen, so little disposed to lend herself to
his views, would then be controuled in his own favor.

By a necessary consequence of these ideas, nature was despoiled of all
power; she was contemplated only as a passive instrument, who acted at
the will, under the influence of the numerous, all-powerful agents to
whom the various superstitions had rendered her subordinate. It was thus
for want of contemplating nature under her true point of view, that man
has mistaken her entirely, that he believed her incapable of producing
any thing by herself; that he ascribed the honor of all those
productions, whether advantageous or disadvantageous to the human
species, to fictitious powers, whom he always clothed with his own
peculiar dispositions, only he aggrandized their force. In short, it
was upon the ruins of nature, that man erected the imaginary colossus of
superstition, that he reared the _altars of a Jupiter, the temples of an
Apollo_.

If the ignorance of nature gave birth to such a variety of gods, the
knowledge of this nature is calculated to destroy them. As soon as man
becomes enlightened, his powers augment, his resources increase in a
ratio with his knowledge; the sciences, the protecting arts, industrious
application, furnish him assistance; experience encourages his progress,
truth procures for him the means of resisting the efforts of many
causes, which cease to alarm him as soon as he obtains a correct
knowledge of them. In a word, his terrors dissipate in proportion as his
mind becomes enlightened, because his trepidation is ever commensurate
with his ignorance, and furnishes this great lesson, that _man,
instructed by truth, ceases to be superstitious_.





CHAP. II.

_Of Mythology, and Theology_.


The elements of nature were, as we have shewn, the first divinities
of man; he has generally commenced with adoring material beings; each
individual, as we have already said, as may be still seen in savage
nations, made to himself a particular god, of some physical object,
which he supposed to be the cause of those events, in which he was
himself interested; he never wandered to seek out of visible nature,
the source either of what happened to himself, or of those phenomena to
which he was a witness. As he every where saw only material effects, he
attributed them to causes of the same genus; incapable in his infancy
of those profound reveries, of those subtle speculations, which are
the fruit of time, the result of leisure, he did not imagine any cause
distinguished from the objects that met his sight, nor of any essence
totally different from every thing he beheld.

The observation of nature was the first study of those who had leisure
to meditate: they could not avoid being struck with the phenomena of the
visible world. The rising and setting of the sun, the periodical return
of the seasons, the variations of the atmosphere, the fertility and
sterility of the earth, the advantages of irrigation, the damage caused
by floods, the useful effects of fire, the terrible consequences
of conflagration, were proper and suitable objects to occupy their
thoughts. It was natural for them to believe that those beings they saw
move of themselves, acted by their own peculiar energies; according as
their influence over the inhabitants of the earth was either favorable
or otherwise, they concluded them to have either the power to injure
them, or the disposition to confer benefits. Those who first acquired
the knowledge of gaining an ascendancy over man, then savage, wandering,
unpolished, or dispersed in woods, with but little attachment to the
soil, of which he had not yet learned to reap the advantage, were always
more practised observers--individuals more instructed in the ways of
nature, than the people, or rather the scattered hordes, whom they found
ignorant and destitute of experience: their superior knowledge placed
them in a capacity to render these services--to discover to them useful
inventions, which attracted the confidence of the unhappy beings to
whom they came to offer an assisting hand; savages who were naked,
half famished, exposed to the injuries of the weather, obnoxious to the
attacks of ferocious beasts, dispersed in caverns, scattered in forests,
occupied with hunting, painfully labouring to procure themselves a very
precarious subsistence, had not sufficient leisure to make discoveries
calculated to facilitate their labour, or to render it less incessant.
These discoveries are generally the fruit of society: isolated beings,
detached families, hardly ever make any discoveries--scarcely ever think
of making any. The savage is a being who lives in a perpetual state of
infancy, who never reaches maturity unless some one comes to draw him
out of his misery. At first repulsive, unsociable, intractable, he by
degrees familiarizes himself with those who render him service; once
gained by their kindness, he readily lends them his confidence; in the
end he goes the length of sacrificing to them his liberty.

It was commonly from the bosom of civilized nations that have issued
those personages who have carried sociability, agriculture, art, laws,
gods, superstition, forms of worship, to those families or hordes as yet
scattered; who united them either to the body of some other nations,
or formed them into new nations, of which they themselves became the
leaders, sometimes the king, frequently the high priest, and often their
god. These softened their manners--gathered them together--taught
them to reap the advantages of their own powers--to render each other
reciprocal assistance--to satisfy their wants with greater facility. In
thus rendering their existence more comfortable, thus augmenting
their happiness, they attracted their love; obtained their veneration,
acquired the right of prescribing opinions to them, made them adopt
such as they had either invented themselves, or else drawn up in the
civilized countries from whence they came. History points out to us the
most famous legislators as men, who, enriched with useful knowledge they
had gleaned in the bosom of polished nations, carried to savages without
industry, needing assistance, those arts, of which, until then, these
rude people were ignorant: such were the Bacchus's, the Orpheus's, the
Triptolemus's, the Numa's, the Zamolixis's; in short, all those who
first gave to nations their gods--their worship--the rudiments of
agriculture, of science, of superstition, of jurisprudence, of religion,
&c.

It will perhaps be enquired, If those nations which at the present day
we see assembled, were all originally dispersed? We reply, that this
dispersion may have been produced at various times, by those terrible
revolutions, of which it has before been remarked our globe has more
than once been the theatre; in times so remote, that history has not
been able to transmit us the detail. Perhaps the approach of more than
one comet may have produced on our earth several universal ravages,
which have at each time annihilated the greater portion of the human
species.

These hypotheses will unquestionably appear bold to those who have not
sufficiently meditated on nature, but to the philosophic enquirer they
are by no means inconsistent. There may not only have been one general
deluge, but even a great number since the existence of our planet; this
globe itself may have been a new production in nature; it may not always
have occupied the place it does at present. Whatever idea may be adopted
on this subject, if it is very certain that, independent of those
exterior causes, which are competent to totally change its face, as the
impulse of a comet may do, this globe contains within itself, a cause
adequate to alter it entirely, since, besides the diurnal and sensible
motion of the earth, it has one extremely slow, almost imperceptible, by
which every thing must eventually be changed in it: this is the motion
from whence depends the _precession_ of the _equinoctial points_,
observed by _Hipparchus_ and other mathematicians, now well understood
by astronomers; by this motion, the earth must at the end of several
thousand years change totally: this motion will at length cause
the ocean to occupy that space which at present forms the lands or
continents. From this it will be obvious that our globe, as well as all
the beings in nature, has a continual disposition to change. This motion
was known to the ancients, and was what gave rise to what they called
their great year, which the Egyptians fixed at thirty-six thousand five
hundred and twenty-five years: the Sabines at thirty-six thousand four
hundred and twenty-five, whilst others have extended it to one hundred
thousand, some even to seven hundred and fifty-three thousand years.
Again, to those general revolutions which our planet has at different
times experienced, way he added those that have been partial, such as
inundations of the sea, earthquakes, subterraneous conflagrations, which
have sometimes had the effect of dispersing particular nations, and
to make them forget all those sciences with which they were, before
acquainted. It is also probable that the first volcanic fires, having
had no previous vent, were more central, and greater in quantity, before
they burst the crust of earth; as the sea washed the whole, it must
have rapidly sunk down into every opening, where, falling on the boiling
lava, it was instantly expanded into steam, producing irresistible
explosion: whence it is reasonable to conclude, that the primaeval
earthquakes wore more widely extended, and of much greater force, than
those which occur in our days. Other vapours may be produced by intense
heat, possessing a much greater elasticity, from substances that
evaporate, such as mercury, diamonds, &c.; the expansive force of these
vapours would be much greater than the steam of water, even at red hot
heat consequently they, way have had sufficient energy to raise islands,
continents, or even to have detached the moon from the earth; if the
moon, as has been supposed by some philosophers, was thrown out of the
great cavity which now contains the South Sea; the immense quantity of
water flowing in from the original ocean, and which then covered the
earth, would much contribute to leave the continents and islands, which
might be raised at the same time, above the surface of the water. In
later days we have accounts of huge stones falling, from the firmament,
which may have been thrown by explosion from some distant earthquake,
without having been impelled with a force sufficient to cause them to
circulate round the earth, and thus produce numerous small moons or
satellites.

Those who were able to escape from the ruin of the world, filled
with consternation, plunged in misery, were but little conditioned to
preserve to their posterity a knowledge, effaced by those misfortunes,
of which they had been both the victims and the witnesses: overwhelmed
with dismay, trembling with fear, they were not able to hand down the
history of their frightful adventures, except by obscure traditions;
much less to transmit to us the opinions, the systems, the arts, the
sciences, anterior to these petrifying revolutions of our sphere. There
have been perhaps men upon the earth from all eternity; but at different
periods they may have been nearly annihilated, together with their
monuments, their sciences, and their arts; those who outlived these
periodical revolutions, each time formed a new race of men, who by dint
of time, labour, and experience, have by degrees withdrawn from
oblivion the inventions of the primitive races. It is, perhaps, to these
periodical revolutions of the human species, that is to be ascribed the
profound ignorance in which we see man yet plunged, upon those objects
that are the most interesting to him. This is, perhaps, the true source
of the imperfection of his knowledge--of the vices of his political
institutions--of the defect in his religion--of the growth of
superstition, over which terror has always presided; here, in all
probability, is the cause of that puerile inexperience, of those jejune
prejudices, which almost every where keep man in a state of infancy, and
which render him so little capable of either listening to reason or
of consulting truth. To judge by the slowness of his progress, by
the feebleness of his advance, in a number of respects, we should be
inclined to say, the human race has either just quitted its cradle, or
that he was never destined to attain the age of virility--to corroborate
his reason.

However it may be with these conjectures, whether the human race may
always have existed upon the earth, whether it may have been a recent
production of nature, whether the larger animals we now behold were
originally derived from the smallest microscopic ones, who have
increased in bulk with the progression of time, or whether, as the
Egyptian philosophers thought, mankind were originally hermaphrodites,
who like the _aphis_ produced the sexual distinction after some
generations, which was also the opinion of Plato, and seems to have
been that of Moses, who was educated amongst these Egyptians, as may be
gathered from the 27th and 28th verses of the first chapter of GENESIS:
"So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he
him; male and female created he them--And GOD blessed them, and GOD
said unto them, be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and
subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl
of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth:" it
is not therefore presuming too much to suppose, as the Egyptians were
a nation very fond of explaining their opinions by hieroglyphics,
that that part which describes Eve as taken out of Adam's rib, was an
hieroglyphic emblem: showing that mankind was in the primitive state of
both sexes, united, who was afterwards divided into males and females.
However, I say, this may be, it is extremely easy to recur to the origin
of many existing nations: we shall find them always in the savage state;
that is, to say, dispersed; composed of families detached from each
other; of wandering, hordes; these were collected together, approximated
at the voice of some missionary or legislator, from whom they
received great benefits, who gave them gods, opinions, and laws. These
personages, of whom the people newly congregated readily acknowledged
the superiority, fixed the national gods, leaving to each individual,
those which he had formed to himself, according to his own peculiar
ideas, or else substituting others brought from those regions, from
whence they themselves had emigrated.

The better to imprint their lessons on the minds of their new subjects,
these men became the guides, the priests, the sovereigns, the masters
of these infant societies; they formed discourses by which they spoke to
the imagination of their willing auditors. POETRY seem best adapted to
strike the mind of these rude people, to engrave on their memory those
ideas with which they were willing to imbue them: its images, its
fictions, its numbers, its rhyme its harmony, all conspired to please
their fancy, to render permanent the impressions it made: thus, the
entire of nature, as well as all its parts, was personified, by its
beautiful allegories: at its soothing voice, trees, stones, rocks,
earth, air, fire, water, by imagination took intelligence, held
conversation with man, and with themselves; the elements were deified by
its songs, every thing was figuratively detailed in harmonious lays.
The sky, which according to the then philosophy, was an arched concave,
spreading over the earth, which was supposed to be a level plain; (for
the doctrine of _antipodes_ is of rather modern date) was itself made
a god; was considered a more suitable residence, as making a greater
distinction for these imaginary deities than the earth on which man
himself resided. Thus the firmament was filled with deities.

Time, under the name of Saturn, was pictured as the son of heaven;
or Coelus by earth, called Terra, or Thea; he was represented as
an inexorable divinity--naturally artful, who devoured his own
children--who revenged the anger of his mother upon his father; for
which purpose she armed him with a scythe, formed of metals drawn from
her own bowels, with which he struck Coelus, in the act of uniting
himself to Thea, and so mutilated him, that he was ever after
incapacitated to increase the number of his children: he was said to
have divided the throne with Janus king of Italy, his reign seems to
have been so mild, so beneficent, that it was called the _golden
age_; human victims were sacrificed on his altars, until abolished by
Hercules, who substituted small images of clay. Festivals in honor of
this god, called Saturnalia, were instituted long antecedent to the
foundation of Rome they were celebrated about the middle of December,
either on the 16th, 17th, or 18th; they lasted in latter times
several days, originally but one. Universal liberty prevailed at the
celebration, slaves were permitted to ridicule their masters--to speak
freely on every subject--no criminals were executed--war never declared;
the priests made their human offerings with their heads uncovered; a
circumstance peculiar to the Saturnalia, not adopted at other festivals.

The igneous matter, the etherial electric fluid, that invisible fire
which vivifies nature, that penetrates all beings, that fertilizes the
earth, which is the great principle of motion, the source of heat, was
deified under the name of Jupiter: his combination with every being in
nature was expressed by his metamorphoses--by the frequent adulteries
imputed to him. He was armed with thunder, to indicate he produced
meteors, to typify the electric fluid that is called lightning. He
married the winds, which were designated under the name of Juno,
therefore called the Goddess of the Winds, their nuptials were
celebrated with great solemnity; all the gods, the entire brute
creation, the whole of mankind attended, except one young woman named
Chelone, who laughed at the ceremonies, for which impiety she was
changed by Mercury into a tortoise, and condemned to perpetual silence.
He was the most powerful of all the gods, and considered as the king and
father both of gods and men: his worship was very extended, performed
with greater solemnity, than that of any other god. Upon his altars
smoked goats, sheep, and white bulls, in which he is said to have
particularly delighted; the oak was rendered sacred to him, because
he taught mankind to live upon acorns; he had many oracles where his
precepts were delivered, the most celebrated of these were at Dodona and
Ammon in Lybia; he was supposed to be invisible to the inhabitants of
the earth; the Lacedemonians erected his statue with four heads, thereby
indicating, that he listened readily to the solicitations of every
quarter of the earth. Minerva is represented as having no mother, but to
have come completely armed from his brains, when his head was opened by
Vulcan; by which it is meant to infer that wisdom is the result of
this ethereal fluid. Thus, following the same fictions, the sun, that
beneficent star which has such a marked influence over the earth, became
an Osiris, a Belus, a Mithras, an Adonis, an Apollo. Nature, rendered
sorrowful by his periodical absence, was an Isis, an Astarte, a Venus,
a Cybele. Astarte had a magnificent temple at Hieropolis served by three
hundred priests, who were always employed in offering sacrifices. The
priests of Cybele, called Corybantes, also Galli, were not admitted to
their sacred functions without previous mutilation. In the celebration
of their festivals these priests used all kinds of indecent expressions,
beat drums, cymbals, and behaved just like madmen: his worship extended
all over Phrygia, and was established in Greece under the name of
_Eleusinian mysteries_. In short, every thing was personified: the sea
was under the empire of Neptune; fire was adored by the Egyptians under
the name of Serapis; by the Persians, under that of Ormus or Oromaze;
and by the Romans, under that of Vesta and Vulcan.

Such was the origin of mythology: it may be said to be the daughter of
natural philosophy, embellished by poetry; only destined to describe
nature and its parts. If antiquity is consulted, it will be perceived
without much trouble, that these famous sages, those legislators, those
priests, those conquerors, who were the instructors of infant nations,
themselves adored active nature, or the great whole considered
relatively to its different operations or qualities; that this was what
they caused the ignorant savages whom they had gathered together to
adore. It was the great whole they deified; it was its various parts
which they made their inferior gods; it was from the necessity of her
laws they made fate. The Greeks called it Nature, a divinity who had
a thousand names. Varro says, "I believe that God is the soul of the
universe, and that the universe is God." Cicero says "that in the
mysteries of Samothracia, of Lemnos, of Eleusis, it was nature much more
than the gods, they explained to the initiated." Pliny says, "we must
believe that the world, or that which is contained under the vast
extent of the heavens, is the Divinity; even eternal, infinite, without
beginning or end." It was these different modes of considering nature
that gave birth to Polytheism, to idolatry. Allegory masqued its mode
of action: it was at length parts of this great whole, that idolatry
represented by statues and symbols.

To complete the proofs of what has been said; to shew distinctly that it
was the great whole, the universe, the nature of things, which was the
real object of the worship of Pagan antiquity, hardly any thing can be
more decisive than the beginning of the hymn of Orpheus addressed to the
god Pan.

"O Pan! I invoke thee, O powerful god! O universal nature! the heavens,
the sea, the earth, who nourish all, and the eternal fire, because these
are thy members, O all powerful Pan," &c. Nothing can be more suitable
to confirm these ideas, than the ingenious explanation which is given
of the fable of Pan, as well as of the figure under which he is
represented. It is said, "Pan, according to the signification of his
name, is the emblem by which the ancients have designated the great
assemblage of things or beings: he represents the universe; and, in the
mind of the wisest philosophers of antiquity, he passed for the greatest
and most ancient of the gods. The features under which he is delineated
form the portrait of nature, and of the savage state in which she was
found in the beginning. The spotted skin of the leopard, which
serves him for a mantle, imagined the heavens filled with stars and
constellations. His person was compounded of parts, some of which were
suitable to a reasonable animal, that is to say, to man; and others to
the animal destitute of reason, such as the goat. It is thus," says
he, "that the universe is composed of an intelligence that governs the
whole, and of the prolific, fruitful elements of fire, water, earth,
air. Pan, loved to drink and to follow the nymphs; this announces the
occasion nature has for humidity in all her productions, and that this
god, like nature, is strongly inclined to propagation. According to the
Egyptians, and the most ancient Grecian philosophers, Pan had neither
father nor mother; he came out of Demogorgon at the same moment with
the Destinies, his fatal sisters; a fine method of expressing that the
universe was the work of an unknown power, and that it was formed after
the invariable relations, the eternal laws of necessity; but his most
significant symbol, that most suitable to express the harmony of the
universe, is his mysterious pipe, composed of seven unequal tubes, but
calculated to produce the nicest, the most perfect concord. The orbs
which compose the seven planets of our solar system, are of different
diameters; being bodies of unequal mass, they describe their revolutions
round the sun in various periods; nevertheless it is from the order of
their motion that results the harmony of the spheres," &c.

Here then is the great macrocosm, the mighty whole, the assemblage of
things adored and deified by the philosophers of antiquity; whilst the
uninformed stopped at the emblem under which this nature was depicted;
at the symbols under which its various parts, its numerous functions
were personified; his narrow mind, his barbarous ignorance, never
permitted him to mount higher; they alone were deemed worthy of being,
initiated into the mysteries, who knew the realities masqued under these
emblems. Indeed, it is not to be doubted for an instant, that the wisest
among the Pagans adored nature; which ethnic theology designated under
a great variety of nomenclature, under an immense number of different
emblems. Apuleius, although a decided Platonist, accustomed to the
mysterious, unintelligible notions of his master, calls "Nature the
parent of all; the mother of the elements, the first offspring of the
world;" again, "the mother of the stars, the parent of the seasons, and
the governess of the whole world."--She was worshipped by many under the
appellation of the _mother of the gods_. Indeed, the first institutors
of nations, and their immediate successors in authority, only spoke to
the people by fables, allegories, enigmas, of which they reserved
to themselves the right of giving an explanation: this, in fact,
constituted the mysteries of the various worship paid to the Pagan
divinities. This mysterious tone they considered necessary, whether it
was to mask their own ignorance, or whether it was to preserve their
power over the uninformed, who for the most part only respect that which
is above their comprehension. Their explications were generally dictated
either by interest, or by a delirious imagination, frequently by
imposture; thus from age to age, they did no more than render nature and
its parts, which they had originally depicted, more unknown, until they
completely lost sight of the primitive ideas; these were replaced by a
multitude of fictitious personages, under whose features this nature had
primarily been represented to them. The people, either unaccustomed to
think, or deeply steeped in ignorance, adored these personages, without
penetrating into the true sense of the emblematical fables recounted to
them. These ideal beings, with material figures, in whom they believed
there resided a mysterious virtue, a divine power, were the objects of
their worship, the source of their fears, the fountain of their
hopes. The wonderful, the incredible actions ascribed to these fancied
divinities, were an inexhaustible fund of admiration, which gave
perpetual play to the fancy; which delighted not only the people of
those days, but even the children of latter ages. Thus were transmitted
from age to age, those marvellous accounts, which, although necessary to
the existence of the power usurped by the ministers of these gods, did,
in fact, nothing more than confirm the blindness of the ignorant: these
never supposed that it was nature, its various operations, its numerous
component parts--that it was the passions of man and his diverse
faculties that lay buried under an heap of allegories; they did not
perceive that the passions and faculties of human nature were used as
emblems, because man was ignorant of the true cause of the phenomena
he beheld. As strong passions seemed to hurry man along, in despite
of himself, they either attributed these passions to a god, or deified
them; frequently they did both: it was thus love became a deity; that
eloquence, poetry, industry, were transformed into gods, under the names
of Hermes, Mercury, Apollo; the stings of conscience were called the
Furies: the people, bowed down in stupid ignorance, had no eyes but
for these emblematical persons, under which nature was masked: they
attributed to their influence the good, to their displeasure the evil,
which they experienced: they entered into every kind of folly, into
the most delirious acts of madness, to render them propitious to their
views; thus, for want of being acquainted with the reality of things,
their worship frequently degenerated into the most cruel extravagance,
into the most ridiculous folly.

Thus it is obvious, that every thing proves nature and its various
parts to have every where been the first divinities of man.
Natural philosophers studied these deities, either superficially or
profoundly,--explained some of their properties, detailed some of their
modes of action. Poets painted them to the imagination of mortals,
either in the most fascinating colours, or under the most
hideous deformities; embodied them--furnished them with reasoning
faculties--recounted their exploits--recorded their will. The statuary
executed sometimes with the most enrapturing art, the ideas of the
poets,--gave substance to their shadows--form to their airy nothings.
The priest decorated these united works with a thousand marvellous
qualities--with the most terrible passions--with the most inconceivable
attributes; gave them, "a local habitation and a name." The people
adored them; prostrated themselves before these gods, who were neither
susceptible of love or hatred, goodness, or malice; they became
persecuting, malevolent, cruel, unjust, in order to render themselves
acceptable to powers generally described to them under the most odious
features.

By dint of reasoning upon these emblems, by meditating upon nature,
thus decorated, or rather disfigured, subsequent speculators no longer
recollected the source from whence their predecessors had drawn their
gods, nor the fantastic ornaments with which they had embellished
them. Natural philosophers and poets were transformed by leisure into
metaphysicians and theologians; tired with contemplating what they could
have understood, they believed they had made an important discovery
by subtilly distinguishing nature from herself--from her own peculiar
energies--from her faculty of action. By degrees they made an
incomprehensible being of this energy, which as before they personified,
this they called the mover of nature, divided it into two, one congenial
to man's happiness, the other inimical to his welfare; these they
deified in the same manner as they had before done nature with her
various parts. These abstract, metaphysical beings, became the
sole object of their thoughts; were the subject of their continual
contemplation; they looked upon them as realities of the highest
importance: thus nature quite disappeared; she was despoiled of her
rights; she was considered as nothing more than an unwieldy mass,
destitute of power; devoid of energy, as an heap of ignoble matter
purely passive: who, incapable of acting by herself, was not competent
to any of the operations they beheld, without the direct, the immediate
agency of the moving powers they had associated with her: which they had
made the fulcrum necessary to the action of the lever. They either did
not or would not perceive, that the _great Cause of causes, ens entium,
Parent of parents_, had, in unravelling chaotic matter, with a wisdom
for which man can never be sufficiently grateful, with a sagacity
which he can never sufficiently admire, foreseen every thing that could
contribute not only to his own individual happiness, but also to that of
all the beings in nature; that he had given this nature immutable laws,
according to which she is for ever regulated; after which she is obliged
invariably to act; that he has described for her an eternal course, from
which it is not permitted her to deviate, even for an instant; that she
is therefore, rendered competent to the production of every phenomena,
not only that he beholds, but of an infinity that he has never yet
contemplated; that she needs not any exterior energy for this purpose,
having received her powers from a hand far superior to any the feeble
weak imagination of man is able to form; that when this nature appears
to afflict him, it is only from the contraction of his own views, from
the narrowness of his own ideas, that he judges; that, in fact, what he
considers the evils of nature, are the greatest possible benefits he
can receive, if he was but in a condition to be acquainted with previous
causes, with subsequent effects. That the evils resulting to him from
his own vices, have equally their remedies in this nature, which it
is his duty to study; which if he does he will find, that the same
omnipotent goodness, who gave her irrefragable laws, also planted in her
bosom, balsams for all his maladies, whether physical or moral: but that
it is not given him to know what this great, this universal cause
is, for purposes of which he ought not to dispute the wisdom, when he
contemplates the mighty wonders that surround him.

Thus man ever preferred an unknown power, to that of which he was
enabled to have some knowledge, if he had only deigned to consult
his experience; but he presently ceases to respect that which he
understands; to estimate those objects which are familiar to him: he
figures to himself something marvellous in every thing he does not
comprehend; his mind, above all, labours to seize upon that which
appears to escape his consideration; in default of experience, he no
longer consults any thing, but his imagination, which feeds him
with chimeras. In consequence, those speculators who have subtilly
distinguished nature from her own powers, have successively laboured
to clothe the powers thus separated with, a thousand incomprehensible
qualities: as they did not see this power, which is only a mode, they
made it a spirit--an intelligence--an incorporeal being; that is to say,
of a substance totally different from every thing of which we have a
knowledge. They never perceived that all their inventions, that all the
words which they imagined, only served to mask their real ignorance;
that all their pretended science was limited to saying, in what manner
nature acted, by a thousand subterfuges which they themselves found
it impossible to comprehend. Man always deceives himself for want of
studying nature; he leads himself astray, every time he is disposed to
go out of it; he is always quickly necessitated to return; he is even
in error when he substitutes words which he does not himself understand,
for things which he would much better comprehend if he was willing to
look at them without prejudice.

Can a theologian ingenuously believe himself more enlightened, for
having substituted the vague words spirit, incorporeal substance, &c. to
the more intelligible terms nature, matter, mobility, necessity? However
this may be, these obscure words once imagined, it was necessary to
attach ideas to them; in doing this, he has not been able to draw them
from any other source than the beings of this despised nature, which are
ever the only beings of which he is enabled to have any knowledge. Man,
consequently, drew them up in himself; his own soul served for the model
of the universal soul, of which indeed according to some it only formed
a portion; his own mind was the standard of the mind that regulated
nature; his own passions, his own desires, were the prototypes of those
by which he actuated this being; his own intelligence was that from
which he formed that of the mover of nature; that which was suitable
to himself, he called the order of nature; this pretended order was the
scale by which he measured the wisdom of this being; in short, those
qualities which he calls perfections in himself, were the archetypes
in miniature, of the perfections of the being, he thus gratuitously
supposed to be the agent, who operated the phenomena of nature. It
was thus, that in despite of all their efforts, the theologians
were, perhaps always will be, true Anthropomorphites. A sect of this
denomination appeared in 359, in Egypt, they held the doctrine that
their god had a bodily shape. Indeed it is very difficult, if not
impossible to prevent man from making himself the sole model of his
divinity. Montaigne says "man is not able to be other than he is, nor
imagine but after his capacity; let him take what pains he may, he will
never have a knowledge of any soul but his own." Xenophanes said, "if
the ox or the elephant understood either sculpture or painting, they
would not fail to represent the divinity under their own peculiar figure
that in this, they would have as much reason as Polyclitus or Phidias,
who gave him the human form." It was said to a very celebrated man that
"God made man after his own image;" "man has returned the compliment,"
replied the philosopher. Indeed, man generally sees in his God, nothing
but a man. Let him subtilize as he will, let him extend his own powers
as he may, let him swell his own perfections to the utmost, he will have
done nothing more than make a gigantic, exaggerated man, whom he will
render illusory by dint of heaping together incompatible qualities. He
will never see in such a god, but a being of the human species, in whom
he will strive to aggrandize the proportions, until he has formed a
being totally inconceivable. It is according to these dispositions that
he attributes intelligence, wisdom, goodness, justice, science, power,
to his divinity, because he is himself intelligent; because he has the
idea of wisdom in some beings of his own species; because he loves to
find in them ideas favourable to himself: because he esteems those
who display equity; because he has a knowledge, which he holds more
extensive in some individuals than himself; in short, because he enjoys
certain faculties which depend on his own organization. He presently
extends or exaggerates all these qualities in forming his god; the sight
of the phenomena of nature, which he feels he is himself incapable
of either producing or imitating, obliges him to make this difference
between the being he pourtrays and himself; but he knows not at what
point to stop; he fears lest he should deceive himself, if he should see
any limits to the qualities he assigns, the word infinite, therefore, is
the abstract, the vague term which he uses to characterize them. He says
that his power is infinite, which signifies that when he beholds those
stupendous effects which nature produces, he has no conception at what
point his power can rest; that his goodness, his wisdom, his knowledge
are infinite: this announces that he is ignorant how far these
perfections ma be carried in a being whose power so much surpasses
his own; that he is of infinite duration, because he is not capable
of conceiving he could have had a beginning or can ever cease to be;
because of this he considers a defect in those transitory beings of
whom he beholds the dissolution, whom he sees are subjected to death. He
presumes the cause of those effects to which he is a witness, of those
striking phenomena that assail his sight, is immutable, permanent, not
subjected to change, like all the evanescent beings whom he knows are
submitted to dissolution, to destruction, to change of form. This mover
of nature being always invisible to man, his mode of action being,
impenetrable, he believes that, like his soul or the concealed principle
which animates his own body, which he calls spiritual, a spirit, is the
moving power of the universe; in consequence he makes a spirit the
soul, the life, the principle of motion in nature. Thus when by dint of
subtilizing, he has arrived at believing the principle by which his body
is moved is a spiritual, immaterial substance, he makes the spirit of
the universe immaterial in like manner: he makes it immense, although
without extent; immoveable, although capable of moving nature:
immutable, although he supposes him to be the author of all the changes,
operated in the universe.

The idea of the unity of God, which cost Socrates his life, because the
Athenians considered those Atheists who believed but in one, was the
tardy fruit of human meditation. Plato himself did not dare to
break entirely the doctrine of _Polytheism_; he preserved Venus, an
all-powerful Jupiter, and a Pallas, who was the goddess of the country.
The sight of those opposite, frequently contradictory effects, which man
saw take place in the world, had a tendency to persuade him there must
be a number of distinct powers or causes independent of each other. He
was unable to conceive that the various phenomena he beheld, sprung from
a single, from an unique cause; he therefore admitted many causes or
gods, acting upon different principles; some of which he considered
friendly, others as inimical to his race. Such is the origin of that
doctrine, so ancient, so universal, which supposed two principles in
nature, or two powers of opposite interests, who were perpetually at war
with each other; by the assistance of which he explained, that constant
mixture of good and evil, that blending of prosperity with misfortune,
in a word, those eternal vicissitudes to which in this world the human
being, is subjected. This is the source of those combats which all
antiquity has supposed to exist between good and wicked gods, between an
Osiris and a Typhoeus; between an Orosmadis and an Arimanis; between a
Jupiter and the Titanes; in these rencounters man for his own peculiar
interest always gave the palm of victory to the beneficent deity; this,
according to all the traditions handed down, ever remained in possession
of the field of battle; it was so far right, as it is evidently for the
benefit of mankind that the good should prevail over the wicked.

When, however, man acknowledged only one God, he generally supposed the
different departments of nature were confided to powers subordinate to
his supreme orders, under whom the sovereign of the gods discharged
his care in the administration of the world. These subaltern gods were
prodigiously multiplied; each man, each town, each country, had
their local, their tutelary gods; every event, whether fortunate or
unfortunate, had a divine cause; was the consequence of a sovereign
decree; each natural effect, every operation of nature, each passion,
depended upon a divinity, which a theological imagination, disposed
to see gods every where, mistaking nature, either embellished or
disfigured. Poetry tuned its harmonious lays, on these occasions,
exaggerated the details, animated its pictures; credulous ignorance
received the portraits with eagerness--heard the doctrines with
submission.

Such is the origin of Polytheism: indeed the Greek word _Theos_, [Greek
letters], is derived from _Theaomai_, [Greek letters], which implies
to contemplate, or take a view of secret or hidden things. Such are the
foundations, such the titles of the hierarchy, which man established
between himself and his gods, because he generally believed he was
incapable of the exalted privilege of immediately addressing himself
to the incomprehensible Being whom he had acknowledged for the only
sovereign of nature, without even having any distinct idea on the
subject: such is the true genealogy of those inferior gods whom the
uninformed place as, a proportional means between themselves and the
first of all other causes. In consequence, among the Greeks and the
Romans, we see the deities divided into two classes, the one were called
great gods, because the whole world were nearly in accord in deifying
the most striking parts of nature, such as the sun, fire; the sea, time,
&c. these formed a kind of aristocratic order, who were distinguished
from the minor gods, or from the multitude of ethnic divinities, who
were entirely local; that is to say, were reverenced only in particular
countries, or by individuals; as in Rome, where every citizen had
his familiar spirit, called lares; and household god, called penates.
Nevertheless, the first rank of these Pagan divinities, like the latter,
were submitted to Fate, that is, to destiny, which obviously is nothing
more than nature acting by immutable, rigorous, necessary laws; this
destiny was looked upon as the god of gods; it is evident, that this
was nothing more than necessity personified; that therefore it was a
weakness in the heathens to fatigue with their sacrifices, to solicit
with their prayers, those divinities whom they themselves believed were
submitted to the decrees of an inexorable destiny, of which it was never
possible for them to alter the mandates. _But man_, generally, _ceases
to reason, whenever his theological notions are either brought into
question, or are the subject of his inquiry_.

What has been already said, serves to show the common source of that
multitude of intermediate powers, subordinate to the gods, but superior
to man, with which he filled the universe: they were venerated under
the names of nymphs, demi-gods, angels, daemons, good and evil genii,
spirits, heroes, saints, &c. Among the Romans they were called _Dei
medioxumi_, intermediate angels; they were looked upon as intercessors,
as mediators, as powers whom it was necessary to reverence, in order
either to obtain their favour, appease their anger, or divert their
malignant intentions; these constitute different classes of intermediate
divinities, who became either the foundation of their hopes, the object
of their fears, the means of consolation, or the source of dread to
those very mortals who only invented them when they found it
impossible to form to themselves distinct, perspicuous ideas of the
incomprehensible Being who governed the world in chief; or when they
despaired of being able to hold communication with him directly.

Meditation and reflection diminished the number of those deities
which composed the ethnic polytheism: some who gave the subject more
consideration than others, reduced the whole to one all-powerful
Jupiter; but still they painted this being in the most hideous
colours, gave him the most revolting features, because they were still
obstinately bent on making man, his action and his passions, the model:
this folly led them into continual perplexities, because it heaped
together contradictory, incompatible, extravagant qualities; it was
quite natural it should do so: the limited views, the superficial
knowledge, the irregular desires of frail, feeble mortals, were but
little calculated to typify the mind of the real Divinity; of that great
_Cause of causes_, that _Parent of parents_, from whom every thing must
have emanated. Although they persuaded themselves it was sinning to give
him rivals, yet they described him as a jealous monarch who could not
bear a division of empire; thus taking the vanity of earthly princes for
their emblem, as if it was possible such a being could have a competitor
like a terrestrial monarch. Not having contemplated the immutable laws
with which he has invested nature, to which every thing it contains is
subjected, which are the result of the most perfect wisdom, they were
puzzled to account for the contrariety of those effects which their
weak minds led them to suppose as evils; seeing that sometimes those who
fulfilled in the most faithful manner their duties in this life, were
involved in the same ruin with the boldest, the most inconsiderate
violaters: thus in making him the immediate agent, instead of the first
author, the executive instead of the formative power, they caused him
to appear capricious, as unreasonably vindictive against his creatures,
when they ought to have known that his wisdom was unlimited, his
kindness without bounds, when he infused into nature that power which
produces these apparently contradictory effects; which, although they
seem injurious to man's interests, are, if he was but capacitated
to judge fairly, the most beneficial advantages that he can possibly
derive. Thus they made the Divinity appear improvident, by continually
employing him to destroy the work of his own hands: they, in fact, taxed
him with impotence, by the perpetual non-performance of those projects
of which their own imbecillity, their own erring judgment, had vainly
supposed him to be the contriver.

To solve these difficulties, man created enemies to the Divinity, who
although subordinate to the supreme God, were nevertheless competent
to disturb his empire, to frustrate his views. Can any thing be worse
conceived, can any thing be more truly derogatory to the great _Parent
of parents_, than thus to make him resemble a king, who is surrounded
with adversaries, willing to dispute with him his diadem? Such, however,
is the origin of the _Fable of the Titanes_, or of the _rebellious
angels_, whose presumption caused them to be plunged into the abyss
of misery--who were changed into _demons_, or into evil genii: these
according to their mythology, had no other functions, than to render
abortive the projects of the Divinity; to seduce, to raise to rebellion,
those who were his subjects. Miserable invention, feeble subterfuge,
for the vices of mankind, although decorated with all the beauty of
language. Can then sublimity of versification, the harmony of numbers,
reconcile man to the idea that the puny offspring of natural causes is
adequate for a single instant to dispute the commands, to thwart the
desires, to render nugatory the decrees of a Being whose wisdom is of
the most polished perfection; whose goodness is boundless; whose power
must be more capacious than the human mind can possibly conceive?

In consequence of this _Fable of the Titanes_, the monarch of nature was
represented as perpetually in a scuffle with the enemies he had himself
created; as unwilling totally to subdue those with whom these fabulists
have described him as dividing his authority--partaking his supreme
power. This again was borrowed from the conduct of earthly monarchs,
who, when they find a potent enemy, make a treaty with him; but this was
quite unnecessary for the great _Cause of causes_; and only shows that
man is utterly incapable of forming any other ideas than those which he
derives from the situation of those of his own race, or of the beings
by whom he is surrounded. According to this fable the subjects of the
universal Monarch were never properly submitted to his authority; like
an earthly king, he was in a continual state of hostility, and punished
those who had the misfortune to enter into the conspiracies of the
enemies of his glory: seeing that human legislators put forth laws,
issued decrees, they established similar institutions for the Divinity;
established oracles; his ministers pretended, through these mysterious
mediums, to convey to the people his heavenly mandates, to unveil his
concealed intentions: the ignorant multitude received these without
examination, they did not perceive that it was man, and not the
Divinity, who thus spoke to them; they did not feel that it must be
impossible for weak creatures to act contrary to the will of God.

The _Fable of the Titanes, or rebellious angels_, is extremely ancient;
very generally diffused over the world; it serves for the foundation
of the theology of the Brachmins of Hindostan: according to these, all
living bodies are animated by _fallen angels_, who under these forms
expiate their rebellion. These contradictory notions were the basis of
nearly all the superstitions of the world; by these means they imagined
they accounted for the origin of evil--demonstrated the cause why the
human species experience misery. In short, the conduct of the most
arbitrary tyrants of the earth was but too frequently brought forth, too
often acted upon, in forming the character of the Divinity, held forth
to the worship of man: their imperfect jurisprudence was the source from
whence they drew that which they ascribed to their god. Pagan theology
was remarkable for displaying in the character of their divinities the
most dissolute vices; for making them vindictive; for causing them to
punish with extreme rigour those, crimes which the oracles predicted; to
doom to the most lasting torments those who sinned without knowing their
transgression; to hurl vengeance on those who were ignorant of their
obscure will, delivered in language which set comprehension at defiance;
unless it was by the priest who both made and fulminated it. It was upon
these unreasonable notions, that the theologians founded the worship
which man ought to render to the Divinity. Do not then let us be at all
surprised if the superstitious man was in a state of continual alarm:
if he experienced trances--if his mind was ever in the most tormenting
dread; the idea of his gods recalled to him unceasingly, that of a
pitiless tyrant who sported with the miseries of his subjects; who,
without being conscious of their own wrong, might at each moment incur
his displeasure: he could not avoid feeling that although they had
formed the universe entirely for man, yet justice did not regulate the
actions of these powerful beings, or rather those of the priests; but he
also believed that their elevated rank placed them infinitely above the
human species, that therefore they might afflict him at their pleasure.

It is then for want of considering good and evil as equally necessary;
it is for want of attributing them to their true causes, that man has
created to himself fictitious powers, malicious divinities, respecting
whom it is found so difficult to undeceive him. Nevertheless, in
contemplating nature, he would have been able to have perceived, that
_physical evil_ is a necessary consequence of the peculiar properties of
some beings; he would have acknowledged that plague, contagion,
disease, are due to physical causes under particular circumstances;
to combinations, which, although extremely natural, are fatal to his
species; he would have sought--in the bosom of nature herself the
remedies suitable to diminish these evils, or to have caused the
cessation of those effects under which he suffered: he would have
seen in like manner that _moral evil_ was the necessary consequence
of defective institutions; that it was not to the Divinity, but to the
injustice of his fellows he ought to ascribe those wars, that
poverty, those famines, those reverses of fortune, those multitudinous
calamities, those vices, those crimes, under which he so frequently
groans. Thus to rid himself of these evils he would not have uselessly
extended his trembling hands towards shadows incapable of relieving him;
towards beings who were not the authors of his sorrows; he would have
sought remedies for these misfortunes in a more rational
administration of justice--in more equitable laws--in more I reasonable
institutions--in a greater degree of benevolence towards his fellow
man--in a more punctual performance of his own duties.

As these gods were generally depicted to man as implacable to his
frailties as they denounced nothing but the most dreadful punishments
against those who involuntarily offended, it is not at all surprising
that the sentiment of fear prevailed over that of love: the gloomy
ideas presented to his mind were calculated to make him tremble, without
making him better; an attention to this truth will serve to explain the
foundation of that fantastical, irrational, frequently cruel worship,
which was paid to these divinities; he often committed the most cruel
extravagancies against his own person, the most hideous crimes against
the person of others, under the idea that in so doing, he disarmed the
anger, appeased the justice, recalled the clemency, deserved the mercy
of his gods.

In general, the superstitious systems of man, his human and other
sacrifices, his prayers, his ceremonies, his customs; have had only for
their object either to divert the fury of his gods, whom he believed he
had offended; to render them propitious to his own selfish views; or
to excite in them that good disposition towards himself, which his own
perverse mode of thinking made him imagine they bestowed exclusively on
others: on the other hand, the efforts, the subtilties of theology, have
seldom had any other end, than to reconcile in the divinities it has
pourtrayed, those discordant ideas which its own dogmas has raised in
the minds of mortals. From what has preceded, it may fairly be concluded
that ethnic theology undermined itself by its own inconsistencies;
that the art of composing chimeras may therefore with great justice be
defined to be that of combining those qualities which are impossible to
be reconciled with each other.





CHAP. III.

_Of the confused and contradictory Ideas of Theology._


Every thing that has been said, proves pretty clearly, that, in despite
of all his efforts, man has never been able to prevent himself from
drawing together from his own peculiar nature, the qualities he has
assigned to the Being who governs the universe. The contradictions
necessarily resulting from the incompatible assemblage of these human
qualities, which cannot become suitable to the same subject, seeing
that the existence of one destroys the existence of the other, have
been shewn:--the theologians themselves have felt the insurmountable
difficulties which their divinities presented to reason: they were
so substantive, that as they felt the impossibility of withdrawing
themselves out of the dilemma, they endeavoured to prevent man
from reasoning, by throwing his mind into confusion--by continually
augmenting the perplexity of those ideas, already so discordant, which
they offered him of the gods. By these means they enveloped them in
mystery, covered them with dense clouds, rendered them inaccessible to
mankind: thus they themselves became the interpreters, the masters of
explaining, according either to their fancy or their interest, the ways
of those enigmatical beings they made him adore. For this purpose they
exaggerated them more and more--neither time nor space, nor the
entire of nature could contain their immensity--every thing became an
impenetrable mystery. Although man has originally borrowed from himself
the traits, the colours, the primitive lineaments of which he composed
his gods; although he has made them jealous, powerful, vindictive
monarchs, yet his theology, by force of dreaming, entirely lost sight
of human nature. In order to render his divinities still more different
from their creatures, it assigned them, over and above the usual
qualities of man, properties so marvellous, so uncommon, so far removed
from every thing of which his mind could form a conception, that he lost
sight of them himself. From thence he persuaded himself these qualities
were divine, because he could no longer comprehend them; he believed
them worthy of his gods, because no man could figure to himself any one
distinct idea of them. Thus theology obtained the point of persuading
man he must believe that which he could not conceive; that he must
receive with submission improbable systems; that he must adopt, with
pious deference, conjectures contrary to his reason; that this reason
itself was the most agreeable sacrifice he could make on the altars of
his gods, who were unwilling he should use the gift they had bestowed
upon him. In short, it had made mortals implicitly believe that they
were not formed to comprehend the thing of all others the most important
to themselves. Thus it is evident that superstition founded its basis
upon the absurd principle that man is obliged to accredit firmly that
which he is in the most complete impossibility of comprehending. On
the other hand, man persuaded himself that the gigantic, the truly
incomprehensible attributes which were assigned to these celestial
monarchs, placed between them and their slaves a distance so immense,
that these could not be by any means offended with the comparison; that
these distinctions rendered them still greater; made them more powerful,
more marvellous, more inaccessible to observation. Man always entertains
the idea, that what he is not in a condition to conceive, is much more
noble, much wore respectable, than that which he has the capacity
to comprehend. The more a thing is removed from his reach, the more
valuable it always appears.

These prejudices in man for the marvellous, appear to have been the
source that gave birth to those wonderful, unintelligible qualities with
which superstition clothed these divinities. The invincible ignorance
of the human mind, whose fears reduced him to despair, engendered those
obscure, vague notions, with which mythology decorated its gods. He
believed he could never displease them, provided he rendered them
incommensurable; impossible to be compared with any thing, of which he
had a knowledge; either with that which was most sublime, or that which
possessed the greatest magnitude, From hence the multitude of negative
attributes with which ingenious dreamers have successively embellished
their phantoms, to the end that they might more surely form a being
distinguished from all others, or which possessed nothing in common with
that which the human mind had the faculty of being acquainted with: they
did not perceive that after all their endeavours, it was nothing wore
than exaggerated human qualities, which they thus heaped together, with
no more skill than a painter would display who should delineate all the
members of the body of the same size, taking a giant for dimension.

The theological attributes with which metaphysicians decorated these
divinities, were in fact nothing but pure negations of the qualities
found in man, or in those beings of which he has a knowledge; by these
attributes their gods were supposed exempted from every thing which they
considered weakness or imperfection in him, or in the beings by whom he
is surrounded: they called every quality infinite, which has been
shewn is only to affirm, that unlike man, or the beings with whom he
is acquainted, it is not circumscribed by the limits of space; this,
however, is what he can never in any manner comprehend, because he is
himself finite. Hobbes in his _Leviathan_, says, "whatsoever we imagine
is finite. Therefore there is no idea, or conception of any thing
we call infinite. No man can have in his mind an image of infinite
magnitude, nor conceive infinite swiftness, infinite time, infinite
force, or infinite power. When we say any thing is infinite, we signify
only, that we are not able to conceive the ends and bound of the thing
named, having no conception of the thing, but of our own inability."
Sherlock says, "the word infinite is only a negation, which signifies
that which has neither end, nor limits, nor extent, and, consequently,
that which has no positive and determinate nature, and is therefore
nothing;" he adds, "that nothing but custom has caused this word to
be adopted, which without that, would appear devoid of sense, and a
contradiction."

When it is said these gods are eternal, it signifies they have not had,
like man or like every thing that exists, a beginning, and that they
will never have an end: to say they are immutable, is to say, that
unlike himself or every thing which he sees, they are not subject to
change: to say they are immaterial, is to advance, that their substance
or essence is of a nature not conceivable by himself, but which must
from that very circumstance be totally different from every thing of
which he has cognizance.

It is from the confused collection of these negative qualities, that has
resulted the theological gods; those metaphysical wholes of which it
is impossible for man to form to himself any correct idea. In
these abstract beings every thing is infinity,--immensity,--
spirituality,--omniscience,--order,--wisdom,--intelligence,--
omnipotence. In combining these vague terms, or these modifications, the
ethnic priests believed they formed something, they extended these
qualities by thought, and they imagined they made gods, whilst they only
composed chimeras. They imagined that these perfections or these
qualities must be suitable to their gods, because they were not suitable
to any thing of which they had a knowledge; they believed that
incomprehensible beings must have inconceivable qualities. These were
the materials of which theology availed itself to compose those
inexplicable shadows before which they commanded the human race to bend
the knee.

Nevertheless, experience soon proved that beings so vague, so impossible
to be conceived, so incapable of definition, so far removed from every
thing of which man could have any knowledge, were but little calculated
to fix his restless views; his mind requires to be arrested by qualities
which he is capacitated to ascertain; of which he is in a condition to
form a judgment. Thus after it had subtilized these metaphysical gods,
after it had rendered them so different in idea, from every thing that
acts upon the senses, theology found itself under the necessity of
again assimilating them to man, from whom it had so far removed them: it
therefore again made them human by the moral qualities which it assigned
them; it felt that without this it would not be able to persuade mankind
there could possibly exist any relation between him and such vague,
ethereal, fugitive, incommensurable beings; that it would never be
competent to secure for them his adoration.

It began to perceive that these marvellous gods were only calculated
to exercise the imagination of some few thinkers, whose minds were
accustomed to labour upon chimerical subjects, or to take words for
realities; in short it found, that for the greater number of the
material children of the earth it was necessary to have gods more
analogous to themselves, more sensible, more known to them. In
consequence these divinities were re-clothed with human qualities;
theology never felt the incompatibility of these qualities with beings
it had made essentially different from man, who consequently could
neither have his properties, nor be modified like himself. It did not
see that gods who were immaterial, destitute of corporeal organs, were
neither able to think nor to act as material beings, whose peculiar
organizations render them susceptible of the qualities, the feelings
the will, the virtues, that are found in them. The necessity it felt to
assimilate the gods to their worshippers, to make an affinity
between them, made it pass over without consideration these palpable
contradictions--this want of keeping in their portrait: thus ethnic
theology obstinately continued to unite those incompatible qualities,
that discrepancy of character, which the human mind attempted in vain
either to conceive or to reconcile: according to it, pure spirits were
the movers of the material world; immense beings were enabled to occupy
space, without however excluding nature; immutable deities were the
causes of those continual changes operated in the world: omnipotent
beings did not prevent those evils which were displeasing to them;
the sources of order submitted to confusion: in short, the wonderful
properties of these theological beings every moment contradicted
themselves.

There is not less discrepancy, less incompatibility, less discordance
in the human perfections, less contradiction in the moral qualities
attributed to them, to the end that man might be enabled to form to
himself some idea of these beings. These were all said to be _eminently_
possessed by the gods, although they every moment contradicted each
other: by this means they formed a kind of patch-work character,
heterogeneous beings, discrepant phenomena, entirely inconceivable to
man, because nature had never constructed any thing like them, whereby
he was enabled to form a judgment. Man was assured they were eminently
good--that it was visible in all their actions. Now goodness is a known
quality, recognizable in some beings of the human species; this is,
above every other, a property he is desirous to find in all those upon
whom he is in a state of dependence; but he is unable to bestow the
title of good on any among his fellows, except their actions produce on
him those effects which he approves--that he finds in unison with his
existence--in conformity with his own peculiar modes of thinking. It was
evident, according to this reasoning, these ethnic gods did not impress
him with this idea; they were said to be equally the authors of his
pleasures, as of his pains, which were to be either secured or averted
by sacrifices: thus when man suffered by contagion, when he was the
victim of shipwreck, when his country was desolated by war, when he saw
whole nations devoured by rapacious earthquakes, when he was a prey to
the keenest sorrows, he at least was unable to conceive the bounty of
those beings. How could he perceive the beautiful order which they had
introduced into the world, while he groaned under such a multitude of
calamities? How was he able to discern the beneficence of men whom he
beheld sporting as it were with his species? How could he conceive the
consistency of those who destroyed that which he was assured they had
taken such pains to establish, solely for his own peculiar happiness?
But had his mind been properly enlightened, had he been taught to know,
that nature, acting by unerring laws, produces all the phenomena he
beholds as a necessary consequence of her primitive impulse--that
like the rest of nature he was himself subjected to the general
operation--that no peculiar exemption had been made in his behalf--that
sacrifices were useless--that the great _Parent of parents_, equally
mindful of all his creatures, had set in action with the most consummate
wisdom an invariable system, the apparent, casual evils of which were
ever counterbalanced by the resulting good; that without repining, it
was his duty, his interest, to submit; at the same time to examine with
sedulity, to search with earnestness, into the recesses of this nature
for remedies to the sorrows he endured. If he had been thus instructed,
we should never behold him arraigning either the kindness, the wisdom,
or the consistency of the gods; he would neither have ascribed his
sufferings to the malicious interference of inferior deities, so
derogatory to the divine majesty of the _Great Cause of causes_, nor
would he have taxed with either inconsistency or unkindness, that nature
which cannot act otherwise than she does. Perhaps of all the ideas that
can be infused into the mind of man, none is more really subversive of
his true happiness, none more incompatible with the reality of things,
than that which persuades him he is himself a privileged being, the king
of a nature where every thing is submitted to laws, the extent of which
his finite mind cannot possibly conceive. Even admitting it should
ultimately turn out to be a fact, he has yet no one positive evidence
to justify the assumption; experience, which after all must always prove
the best criterion for his judgment, daily proves, that in every thing
he is subjected, like every other part of nature, to those invariable
decrees from which nothing that he beholds is exempted.

Feeble monarch! of whom a grain of sand, some atoms of bile, some
misplaced humours, destroy at once the existence and the reign: yet thou
pretendest every thing was made for thee! Thou desirest that the entire
of nature should be thy domain, and thou canst not even defend thyself
from the slightest of her shocks! Thou makest to thyself a god for
thyself alone; thou supposest that he unceasingly occupieth himself only
for thy peculiar happiness; thou imaginest every thing was made solely
for thy pleasure; and, following up thy presumptuous ideas, thou hast
the audacity to call nature good or bad as thy weak intellect inclines:
thou darest to think that the kindness exhibited towards thee, in common
with other beings, is contradicted by the evil genii thy fancy has
created! Dost thou not see that those beasts which thou supposest
submitted to thine empire, frequently devour thy fellow-creatures;
that fire consumeth them; that the ocean swalloweth them up; that those
elements of which thou sometimes admirest the order, which sometimes
thou accusest of confusion, frequently sweep them off the face of the
earth; dost thou not see that all this is necessarily what it must be;
that thou art not in any manner consulted in any of this phenomena?
Indeed, according to thine own ideas, if thou wast to examine them with
care, dost thou not admit that thy gods are the universal cause of all;
that they maintain the whole by the destruction of its parts. Are they
not then according to thyself, the gods of nature--of the ocean--of
rivers--of mountains--of the earth, in which they occupiest, so very
small a space--of all those other globes that thou seest roll in
the regions of space--of those orbs that revolve round the sun that
enlighteneth thee?--Cease, then, obstinately to persist in beholding
nothing but thy sickly self in nature; do not flatter thyself that the
human race, which reneweth itself, which disappeareth like the leaves
on the trees, can absorb all the care, can ingross all the tenderness
of that universal being, who, according to thyself, properly understood,
ruleth the destiny of all things. Submit thyself in silence to mandates
which thy unavailing prayers; can never change; to a wisdom which
thy imbecility cannot fathom; to the unerring shafts of a fate, which
nothing but thine own vanity, aided by thy perverse ignorance, could
ever question, being the best possible good that can befall thee! which
if thou couldst alter, thou wouldst with thy defective judgment render
worse! What is the human race compared to the earth? What is this earth
compared to the sun? What is our sun compared to those myriads of suns
which at immense distances occupy the regions of space? not for the
purpose of diverting thy weak eyes; not with a view to excite thy stupid
admiration, as thou vainly imaginest; since multitudes of them are
placed out of the range of thy visual organs: but to occupy the place
which necessity hath assigned them. Mortal, feeble and vain! restore
thyself to thy proper sphere; acknowledge every where the effect
of necessity; recognize in thy benefits, behold in thy sorrows, the
different modes of action of those various beings endowed with such a
variety of properties, which surround thee; of which the macrocosm is
the assemblage; and do not any longer suppose that this nature, much
less its great cause, can possess such incompatible qualities as would
be the result of human views or of visionary ideas, which have no
existence but in thyself.

As long as theologians shall continue obstinately bent to make man the
model of their gods; as long ask they shall pertinaciously undertake to
explain the nature of these gods, which they will never be able to
do, but after human ideas, although they may associate the most
heterogeneous properties, the most discrepant functions; so long, I say,
experience will contradict at every moment the beneficent views they,
attach to their divinities; it will be in vain that they call them
good: man, reasoning thus, will never be able to find good but in those
objects which impel him in a manner favourable to his actual mode
of existence; he always finds confusion in that which fills him with
grievous sensations; he calls evil every thing that painfully affects
him, even cursorily; those beings that produce in him two modes of
feeling, so very opposite to each other, he will naturally conclude are
sometimes favourable, sometimes unfavourable to him; at least, if he
will not allow that they act necessarily, consequently are neither one
nor the other, he will say that a world where he experiences so much
evil cannot be submitted to men who are perfectly good; on the other
hand, he will also assume that a world in which man receives so many
benefits, cannot be governed by those who are without kindness. Thus
he is obliged to admit of two principles equally powerful, who are
in hostility with each other; or rather, he must agree that the same
persons are alternately kind and unkind; this after all is nothing more
than avowing they cannot be otherwise than they are; in this case it
would be useless to sacrifice to them--to make solicitation; seeing
it would be nothing but _destiny_--the necessity of things submitted
invariable rules.

In order to justify these beings, constructed upon mortal principles,
from injustice, in consequence of the evils the human species
experience, the theologian is reduced to the necessity of calling them
punishments inflicted for the transgressions of man. But then these
general calamities include all men. Some, at least, may be supposed not
to have offended. Thus he involves contradictions he finds it difficult
to reconcile; to effectuate this he makes his _anthropomorphites_
immaterial--incorporeal; that is, he says they are the negation of every
thing of which he has a knowledge; consequently, beings who can have no
relation with corporeal beings: and this avails him no better, as
will be evident by reasoning on the subject. To offend any one, is to
diminish the sum of his happiness; it is to afflict him, to deprive
him of something, to make him experience a painful sensation. How is it
possible man can operate on such beings; how can the physical actions
of a material substance have any influence over an immaterial substance,
devoid of parts, having no point of contact. How can a corporeal being
make an incorporeal being experience incommodious sensations? On the
other hand, _justice_, according to the only ideas man can ever form of
it, supposes, a permanent disposition to render to each what is due
to him; the theologian will not admit that the beings he has jumbled
together owe any thing to man; he insists that the benefits they bestow
are all the gratuitous effects of their own goodness; that they have
the right to dispose of the work of their hands according to their
own pleasure; to plunge it if they please into the abyss of misery; in
short, that their volition is the only guide of their conduct. It is
easy to see, that according to man's idea of justice, this does not
even contain the shadow of it; that it is, in fact, the mode of action
adopted by what he calls the most frightful tyrants. How then can he
be induced to call men just who act after this manner? Indeed, while
he sees innocence suffering, virtue in tears, crime triumphant, vice
recompensed, and at the same time, is told the beings whom theology has
invented are the authors, he will never be able to acknowledge them
to have _justice_. But he will find no such contradictory qualities in
nature, where every thing is the result of immutable laws: he will at
once perceive that these transient evils produce more permanent good;
that they are necessary to the conservation of the whole, or else result
from modifications of matter, which it is competent for him to change,
by altering his own mode of action; a lesson that nature herself teaches
him when he is willing to receive her instructions. But to form gods
with human passions, is to make them appear unjust; to say that such
beings chastise their friends for their own I good, is at once to
upset all the ideas he has either of kindness or unkindness: thus
the incompatible human qualities ascribed to these beings, do in fact
destroy their existence. If it be insisted they have the knowledge and
power of man, only that they are more extended, then it becomes a very
natural reply, to say, since they know every thing, they ought at least
to restrain mischief; because this would be the observation of man upon
the action of his fellows;--if it be urged these qualities are similar
to the same qualities possessed by man, then it may be fairly asked in
what do they differ? To this, if any answer be given, be what it may, it
will still be only changing the language: it will be invariably another
method of expressing the same thing; seeing that man with all his
ingenuity, will never be able to describe properties but after himself
or those of the beings by whom he is surrounded.

Where is the man filled with kindness, endowed with humanity, who does
not desire with all his heart to render his fellow creatures happy? If
these beings, as the theologians assert, really have man's qualities
augmented, would they not, by the same reasoning, exercise their
infinite power to render them all happy? Nevertheless, in despite of
these theologists, we scarcely find any one who is perfectly satisfied
with his condition on earth: for one mortal that enjoys, we behold
a thousand who suffer; for one rich man who lives in the midst of
abundance, there are thousands of poor who want common necessaries:
whole nations groan in indigence, to satisfy the passions of some
avaricious princes, of some few nobles, who are not thereby rendered
more contented--who do not acknowledge themselves more fortunate on
that account. In short, under the dominion of these beings, the earth
is drenched with the tears of the miserable. What must be the inference
from all this? That they are either negligent of, or incompetent to, his
happiness. But the mythologists will tell you coolly, that the judgments
of his gods are impenetrable! How do we understand this term? Not to be
taught--not to be informed--impervious--not to be pierced: in this case
it would be an unreasonable question to inquire by what authority do you
reason upon them? How do you become acquainted with these impenetrable
mysteries? Upon what foundation do you attribute virtues which you
cannot penetrate? What idea do you form to yourself of a justice that
never resembles that of man? Or is it a truth that you yourself are not
a man, but one of those impenetrable beings whom you say you represent?

To withdraw themselves from this, they will affirm that the justice of
these idols are tempered with mercy, with compassion, with goodness:
these again are human qualities: what, therefore, shall we understand by
them? What idea do we attach to mercy? Is it not a derogation from the
severe rules of an exact, a rigorous justice, which causes a
remission of some part of a merited punishment? Here hinges the great
incompatibility, the incongruity of those qualities, especially when
augmented by the word _omni_; which shews how little suitable human
properties are to the formation of divinities. In a prince, clemency is
either a violation of justice, or the exemption from a too severe law:
nevertheless, man approves of clemency in a sovereign, when its too
great facility does not become prejudicial to society; he esteems it,
because it announces humanity, mildness, a compassionate, noble soul;
qualities he prefers in his governors to rigour, cruelty, inflexibility:
besides, human laws are defective; they are frequently too severe; they
are not competent to foresee all the circumstances of every case: the
punishments they decree are not always commensurate with the offence:
he therefore does not always think them just: but he feels very well,
he understands distinctly, that when the sovereign extends his mercy, he
relaxes from his justice--that if mercy he merited, the punishment ought
not to take place--that then its exercise is no longer clemency, but
justice: thus he feels, that in his fellow creatures these two qualities
cannot exist at the same moment. How then is he to form his judgment of
beings who are represented to possess both in the extremest degree? Is
it not, in fact, announcing these beings to be men like ourselves, who
act with our imperfections on an enlarged scale?

They then say, well, but in the next world these idols will reward you
for all the evils you suffer in this: this, indeed, is something to
look to, if it could be contemplated alone; unmixed with all they have
formerly asserted: if we could also find that there was an unison of
thinking on this point--if there was a reasonable comprehensible view of
it held forth: but alas! here again human pleasures, human feelings, are
the basis on which these rewards are rested; only they are promised in a
way we cannot comprehend them; houris, or females who are to remain for
ever virgins, notwithstanding the knowledge of man, are so opposed to
all human comprehension, so opposite to all experience, are such mystic
assertions, that the human mind cannot possibly embrace an idea of
them: besides this is only promised by one class of these beings; others
affirm it will be altogether different: in short, the number of modes
in which this hereafter reward is promised to him, obliges man to ask
himself one plain question, Which is the real history of these blissful
abodes? At this question he staggers--he seeks for advice: each assures
him that the other is in error--that his peculiar mode is that which
will really have place; that to believe the other is a crime. How is
he to judge now? Take what course he will, he runs the chance of being
wrong; he has no standard whereby to measure the correctness of these
contradictory assurances; his mind is held suspended; he feels the
impossibility of the whole being right; he knows not that which he ought
to elect! Again, they have positively asserted these beings owe nothing
to man: how then is he to expect in a future life, a more real happiness
than he enjoys in the present? This they parry, by assuring him it
is founded upon their promises, contained in their revealed oracles.
Granted: but is he quite certain these oracles have emanated from
themselves? If they are so different in their detail, may there not
be reasonable ground for suspecting some of them are not authentic? If
there is, which are the spurious, which are the genuine? By what rule
is he to guide himself in the choice; how, with his frail methods
of judging, is he to scrutinize oracles delivered by such powerful
beings--to discriminate the true from the false? The ministers of each
will give you an infallible method, one that, is according to their
own asseveration, cannot err; that is, by an implicit belief in the
particular doctrine each promulgates.

Thus will be perceived the multitude of contradictions, the extravagant
hypotheses which these human attributes, with which theology clothes its
divinities, must necessarily produce. Beings embracing at one time so
many discordant qualities will always be undefinable--can only present a
train of ideas calculated to displace each other; they will consequently
ever remain beings of the imagination. These beings, say their
ministers, created the heavens, the earth, the creatures who inhabit
it, to manifest their own peculiar glory; they have neither rivals, nor
equals in nature; nothing which can be compared with them. Glory
is, again, a human passion: it is in man the desire of giving his
fellow-creatures an high opinion of him; this, passion is laudable when
it stimulates him to undertake great projects--when it determines him to
perform useful actions--but it is very frequently a weakness attached
to his nature; it is nothing more than a desire to be distinguished from
those beings with whom he compares himself, without exciting him to one
noble, one generous act. It is easy to perceive that beings who are so
much elevated above men, cannot be actuated by such a defective passion.
They say these beings are jealous of their prerogatives. Jealousy is
another human passion, not always of the most respectable kind: but it
is rather difficult to conceive the existence of jealousy with profound
wisdom, unlimited power, and the perfection of justice. Thus the
theologians by dint of heaping quality on quality, aggrandizing each as
is added, seem to have reduced themselves to the situation of a painter,
who spreading all his colours upon his canvas together, after thus
blending them into an unique mass, loses sight of the whole in the
composition.

They will, nevertheless, reply to these difficulties, that goodness,
wisdom, justice, are in these beings qualities so pre-eminent, so
distinct, have so little affinity with these same qualities in man, that
they are totally dissimilar--have not the least relation. Admit this
to be the case, How then can he form to himself any idea of these
perfections, seeing they are totally unlike those with which he is
acquainted? They surely cannot mean to insinuate that they are the
reverse of every thing he understands; because that would, in effect,
bring them to a precise point which would not need any explanation;
it is therefore a matter of certainty this cannot be the case: then if
these qualities, when exercised by the beings they have described, are
only human actions so obscured, so hidden, as not to be recognizable by
man, How can weak mortals pretend to announce them, to have a knowledge
of them, to explain them to others? Does then theology impart to the
mind the ineffable boon of enabling it to conceive that which no man is
competent to understand? Does it procure for its agents the marvellous
faculty of having distinct ideas of beings composed of so many
contradictory properties? Does it, in fact, make the theologian himself
one of these incomprehensible beings.

They will impose silence, by saying the oracles have spoken; that
through these mystical means they have made themselves known to mortals.
The next question would naturally be, When, where, or to whom have
these oracles spoken? Where are these oracles? An hundred voices raise
themselves in the same moment; hands of Briaraeus are immediately
stretched forth to shew them in a number of discordant collections,
which each maintains, with an equal degree of vehemence, is the true
code--the only doctrine man ought to believe: he runs them over, finds
they scarcely agree in any one particular; but that in all the heaviest
penalties are denounced against those who doubt the smallest part of
any one of them. These beings of consummate wisdom are made to speak an
obscure, irrational language; some of them, although their goodness
is proclaimed, have been cruel and sanguinary; others, although their
justice is held forth, have been partial, unjust, capricious; some, who
are represented as all merciful, destine to the most hideous punishments
the unhappy victims to their wrath: examine any one of them more
closely, he will find that they have never in any two countries held
literally the same language: that although they are said to have spoken
in many places, that they have always spoken variously: What is the
necessary result? The human mind, incapable of reconciling such manifest
contradictions, unable to obtain from their ministers any corroborative
evidence, that is not disputed by the others, falls into the strangest
perplexity; is involved in doubts, entangled in a labyrinth to which no
clue is to be found.

Thus the relations, which are supposed to exist between man and these
theological idols, can only be founded on the moral qualities of these
beings: if these are not known to him, if he cannot in any manner
comprehend them, they cannot by any ingenuity of argument serve him for
models. In order that they may be imitated, it is needful that these
qualities were cognizable by the being who is to imitate them. How
can he imitate that goodness, that justice, that mercy, which does not
resemble either his own, or any thing he can conceive? If these beings
partake in nothing of that which forms man--if the properties they
do possess, although different, are not within the reach of his
comprehension--if, he cannot embrace the most distant idea of them,
which the theologian assures him he cannot, How is it possible he
can set about imitating them? How follow a conduct suitable to please
them--to render himself acceptable in their sight? What can in effect
be the motive of that worship, of that homage, of that obedience, which
these beings are said to exact--which he is informed he should offer
at their altars, if he does not establish it upon their goodness--their
veracity--their justice: in short, upon qualities which he is competent
to understand? How can he have clear, distinct ideas of those qualities,
if they are no longer of the same nature as those which he has learned
to reverence in the beings of his own species?

To this they will reply, because none of them ever admit the least doubt
of the rectitude of their own individual creed, that there can be no
proportion between these idols and mortals, who are the work of their
hands; that it is not permitted to the clay to demand of the potter who
has formed it, "why ye have fashioned me thus;"--but if there can be
no common measure between the workman and his work--if there can be
no analogy between them, because the one is immaterial, the other
corporeal, How do they reciprocally act upon each other? How can the
gross organs of the one, comprehend the subtile quality of the other?
Reasoning in the only way he is capable, and it surely will never be
seriously argued that he is not to reason, will he not perceive that
the earthen vase could only have received the form which it pleased the
potter to give; that if it is formed badly, if it is rendered inadequate
to the use for which it was designed, the vase is not in this instance
to be blamed; the potter certainly has the power to break it; the vase
cannot prevent him; it will neither have motives nor means to soften his
anger; it will be obliged to submit to its destiny; but he will not
be able to prevent his mind from thinking the potter harsh in thus
punishing the vase, rather than by forming it anew, by giving it another
figure, render it competent to the purposes he intended.

According to these notions the relations between man and these
theological beings have no existence, they owe nothing to him, are
dispensed from shewing him either goodness or justice; that man, on
the contrary, owes them every thing: but contradictions appear at every
step. If these have promised by their oracles any thing to man, it is
rather difficult for him to believe, that what is so solemnly promised
does not belong to him if he fulfils the condition of the promise.
The difference a theologian may choose to find in these relations will
hardly be convincing to a reasonable mind. The duties of man towards
these beings can, according to their own shewing, have no other
foundation than the happiness he expects from them: thus the relation
has a reciprocity, it is founded upon their goodness, upon their
justice, it demands obedience on his part, a conduct suitable to the
benefits he receives. Thus, in whatever manner the theological system
is viewed, it destroys itself. Will theology never feel that the more
it endeavours to exaggerate the human qualities, the less it exalts the
beings it pictures; the more incomprehensible it renders them, the more
it contributes to swell its own ocean of contradictions; that to take
human passions, mortal faculties at all, is perhaps the worst means it
can pursue to form a perfect being; but that if it must persist in this
method, then the further they remove them from man, the more they debase
him, the more they weaken the relations subsisting between them: that
in thus aggregating human properties, it should carefully abstain from
associating in these pictures those qualities which man finds detestable
in his fellows. Thus, despotism in man is looked upon as an unjust,
unreasonable power; if it introduces such a quality into its portraits,
it cannot rationally suppose them suitable to cultivate the esteem, to
attract the voluntary homage of the human race: if, however, the canvas
be examined, we shall frequently be struck, with perceiving this the
leading feature; we shall equally find a want of keeping through the
whole; that shadows are introduced, where lights ought to prevail; that
the colouring is incongruous--the design without harmony.

The discrepancy of conduct which theology imputes to these idols, is not
less remarkable than the contrariety of qualities it ascribes to
them, or the inconsistency of the passions with which it invests them;
sometimes, according to this, they are the friends to reason, desirous
of the happiness of society; sometimes they are inimical to virtue;
interdict the use of reason; flattered with seeing society disturbed,
they sometimes afflict man without his being able to guess the cause of
their displeasure; sometimes they are favourable to mankind--at others,
indisposed towards the human species: sometimes they are represented as
permitting crimes for the pleasure of punishing them--at others, they
exert all their power to arrest crime in its birth; sometimes they elect
a small number to receive eternal happiness, predestinating the rest to
perpetual misery--to everlasting torments; at others, they throw open
the gates of mercy to all who choose to enter them; sometimes they are
pourtrayed as destroying the universe--at others, as establishing the
most beautiful order in the planet we inhabit; sometimes they are held
forth as countenancing deception--at others, as having the highest
reverence for truth--as holding deceit in abomination. This, again, is
the necessary result of the human faculties, the mortal passions, the
frail qualities of which they compose the beings they hold forth to the
admiration, to the worship, to the homage of the world.

Perhaps the most fatal consequences have arisen from founding the moral
character of these divinities upon that of man. Those who first had the
confidence to tell man that in these matters it was not permitted him
to consult his reason, that the interests of society demanded its
sacrifice, evidently proposed to themselves to make him the sport of
their own wantonness--to make him the blind instrument of their own
unworthiness. It is from this radical error that has sprung all those
extravagances which the various superstitions have introduced upon
the earth: from hence has flowed that sacred fury which has frequently
deluged it with blood: here is the cause of those inhuman persecutions
which have so often desolated nations: in short, all those horrid
tragedies which have been acted on the vast theatre of the world, by
command of the different ministers of the various systems, whose gods
they have said ordained these shocking spectacles.

The theologians themselves have thus been the means, of calumniating
the gods they pretended to serve, under the pretext of exalting their
name--of covering them with glory; in this they may have been said to be
true atheists, since they seem only to have been anxious to destroy the
idols they themselves had raised, by the actions they have attributed
to them--which has debased them in the eye of reason--rendered their
existence more than doubtful to the man of humanity. Indeed, it would
require more than human credulity to accredit the assertion that these
beings ever could order the atrocities committed in their name. Every
time they have been willing to disturb the harmony of mankind--whenever
they have been desirous to render him unsociable, they have cried out
that their gods ordained that he should be so. Thus they render mortals
uncertain, make the ethical system fluctuate by founding it upon
changeable, capricious idols, whom they represent much more frequently
cruel and unjust, than filled with bounty and benevolence.

However it may be, admitting if they will for a moment that their idols
possess all the human virtues in an infinite degree of perfection, we
shall quickly be obliged to acknowledge that they cannot connect them
with those metaphysical, theological, negative attributes, of which we
have already spoken. If these beings are spirits that are immaterial,
how can they be able to act like man, who is a corporeal being? Pure
spirits, according to the only idea man can form of them, having no
organs, no parts, cannot see any thing; can neither hear our prayers,
attend to our solicitations, nor have compassion for our miseries.
They cannot be immutable, if their dispositions can suffer change: they
cannot be infinite, if the totality of nature, without being them, can
exist conjointly with them: they cannot be omnipotent, if they either
permit or do not prevent evil: they cannot be omnipresent, if they are
not every where: they must therefore be in the evil as well as in the
good. Thus in whatever manner they are contemplated, under whatever
point of view they are considered, the human qualities which are
assigned to them, necessarily destroy each other; neither can these
same properties in any possible manner combine themselves with the
supernatural attributes given to them by theology.

With respect to the revealed will of these idols, by means of
their oracles, far from being a proof of their good will, of their
commisseration for man, it would rather seem evidence of their ill-will.
It supposes them capable of leaving mankind for a considerable season
unacquainted with truths highly important to their interests; these
oracles communicated to a small number of chosen men, are indicative of
partiality, of predilections, that are but little compatible with the
common Father of the human race. These oracles were ill imagined,
since they tend to injure the immutability ascribed to these idols, by
supposing that they permitted man to be ignorant at one time of their
will, whilst at another time they were willing he should be instructed
on the subject. Moreover, these oracles frequently predicted offences
for which afterwards severe punishments were inflicted on those who did
no more than fulfil them. This, according to the reasoning of man, would
be unjust. The ambiguous language in which they were delivered, the
almost impossibility of comprehending them, the inexplicable mysteries
they contained, seemed to render them doubtful; at least they are
not consistent with the ideas man is capable of forming of infinite
perfection: but the fact clearly is, they were thus rendered capable of
application to the contingency of events--could be made to suit
almost any circumstances: this would render it not a very improbable
conjecture, that these oracles were solely delivered by the priests
themselves. It these were tried by the only test of which he has any
knowledge--HIS REASON, it would naturally occur to the mind of man, that
mystery could never, on any occasion, be used in the promulgation of
substantive decrees meant to operate on the obedience, to actuate the
moral conduct of man: it is quite usual with most legislators to
render their laws as explicit as possible, to adapt them to the meanest
understanding; in short, it would be reckoned want of good faith in a
government, to throw a thick, mysterious veil over the announcement of
that conduct which it wished its citizens to adopt; they would be apt
to think such a procedure was either meant to cover its own peculiar
ignorance, or else to entrap them into a snare; at best, it would be
considered as furnishing a never-failing source of dispute, which a wise
government would endeavour to avoid.

It will thus be obvious, that the ideas which theology has at various
times, under various systems, held forth to man, have for the most part
been confused, discordant, incompatible, and have had a general tendency
to disturb the repose of mankind. The obscure notions, the vague
speculations of these multiplied creeds, would be matter of great
indifference, if man was not taught to hold them as highly important
to his welfare--if he did not draw from them conclusions pernicious to
himself--if he did not learn from these theologians that he must sharpen
his asperity against those who do not contemplate them in the same point
of view with himself: as he perhaps, then, will never have a common
standard, a fixed rule, a regular graduated scale, whereby to form
his judgment on these points--as all efforts of the imagination must
necessarily assume divers shapes, undergo a variety of modifications,
which can never be assimilated to each other, it was little likely that
mankind would at all times be able to understand each other on this
subject; much less that they would be in accord in the opinions they
should adopt. From hence that diversity of superstitions which in
all ages have given rise to the most irrational disputes; which
have engendered the most sanguinary wars; which have caused the most
barbarous massacres; which have divided man from his fellow by the most
rancorous animosities, that will perhaps never be healed; because he has
been impelled to consider the peculiar tenets he adopted, not only as
immediately essential to his individual welfare, but also as intimately
connected with the happiness, closely interwoven with the tranquillity
of the nation of which he was a citizen. That such contrariety of
sentiment, such discrepancy of opinion should exist, is not in the least
surprising; it is, in fact, the natural result of those physical causes
to which, as long as he exists, he is at all times submitted. The man
of a heated imagination cannot accommodate himself to the god of a
phlegmatic, tranquil being: the infirm, bilious, discontented, angry
mortal, cannot view him under the same aspect as he who enjoys a sounder
constitution,--as the individual of a gay turn, who enjoys the
blessing of content, who wishes to live in peace. An equitable, kind,
compassionate, tender-hearted man, will not delineate to himself
the same portrait of his god, as the man who is of an harsh, unjust,
inflexible, wicked character. Each individual will modify his god after
his own peculiar manner of existing, after his own mode of thinking,
according to his particular mode of feeling. A wise, honest, rational
man will always figure to himself his god as humane and just.

Nevertheless, as fear usually presided at the formation of those idols
man set up for the object of his worship; as the ideas of these beings
were generally associated with that of terror as the recollections
of sufferings, which he attributed to them, often made him tremble;
frequently awakened in his mind the most afflicting, reminiscence; as
it sometimes filled him with inquietude, sometimes inflamed his
imagination, sometimes overwhelmed him with dismay, the experience of
all ages proves, that these vague idols became the most important of all
considerations--was the affair which most seriously occupied the human
race: that they every where spread consternation--produced the most
frightful ravages, by the delirious inebriation resulting from the
opinions with which they intoxicated the mind. Indeed, it is extremely
difficult to prevent habitual fear, which of all human passions is the
most incommodious, from becoming a dangerous leaven; which in the long
run will sour, exasperate, and give malignancy to the most moderate
temperament.

If a misanthrope, in hatred of his race, had formed the project
of throwing man into the greatest perplexity,--if a tyrant, in the
plenitude of his unruly desire to punish, had sought out the most
efficacious means; could either the one or the other have imagined that
which was so well calculated to gratify their revenge, as thus to occupy
him unceasingly with objects not only unknown to him, but which no
two of them should ever see with precisely the same eyes; which
notwithstanding they should be obliged to contemplate as the centre of
all their thoughts--as the only model of their conduct--as the end of
all their actions--as the subject of all their research--as a thing of
more importance to them than life itself; upon which all their present
felicity, all their future happiness, must necessarily depend? Could the
gods themselves, in their solicitude to punish the impious Prometheus,
for having stolen fire from the sun, have imagined a more certain method
of executing their wishes? Was not Pandora's box, though stuffed with
evils, trifling when compared with this? That at least left hope, to the
unfortunate Epimetheus; this effectually cut it off.

If man was subjected to an absolute monarch, to a sultan who should keep
himself secluded from his subjects; who followed no rule but his own
desires; who did not feel himself bound by any duty; who could for ever
punish the offences committed against him; whose fury it was easy
to provoke; who was irritated even by the ideas, the thoughts of his
subjects; whose displeasure might be incurred without even their own
knowledge; the name of such a sovereign would assuredly be sufficient to
carry trouble, to spread terror, to diffuse consternation into the very
souls of those who should hear it pronounced; his idea would haunt them
every where--would unceasingly afflict them--would plunge them into
despair. What tortures would not their mind endure to discover this
formidable being, to ascertain the secret of pleasing him! What labour
would not their imagination bestow, to discover what mode of conduct
might be able to disarm his anger! What fears would assail them, lest
they might not have justly hit upon the means of assuaging his wrath!
What disputes would they not enter into upon the nature, the qualities
of a ruler, equally unknown to them all! What a variety of means would
not be adopted, to find favour in his eyes; to avert his chastisement!

Such is the history of the effects superstition has produced upon the
earth. Man has always been panic-struck, because the systems adopted
never enable him to form any correct opinion, any fixed ideas, upon
a subject so material to his happiness; because every thing conspired
either to give his ideas a fallacious turn, or else to keep his mind in
the most profound ignorance; when he was willing to set himself
right, when he was sedulous to examine the path which conducted to his
felicity, when he was desirous of probing opinions so consequential to
his peace, involving so much mystery, yet combining both his hopes
and his fears, he was forbidden to employ the only proper method,--HIS
REASON, guided by his experience; he was assured this would be an
offence the most indelible. If he asked, Wherefore his reason had then
been given him, since he was not to use it in matters of such high
behest? he was answered, those were mysteries of which none but the
initiated could be informed; that it sufficed for him to know, that
the reason which he seemed so highly to prize, which he held in so
much esteem, was his most dangerous enemy--his most inveterate, most
determined foe. Where can be the propriety of such an argument? Can it
really be that reason is dangerous? If so, the Turks are justified in
their predilection for madmen: but to proceed, he is told that he must
believe in the gods, not question the mission of their priests; in
short, that he had nothing to do with the laws they imposed, but to
obey them: when he then required that these laws might at least be
made comprehensible to him; that he might be placed in a capacity
to understand them; the old answer was returned, that they were
_mysteries_; he must not inquire into them. But where is the necessity
for mystery in points of such vast importance? He might, indeed,
from time to time consult these oracles, when he was able to make the
sacrifices demanded; he would then receive precepts for his conduct:
these were always, however, given in such vague, indeterminate terms,
that he had scarcely the chance of acting right. At different times the
same oracles delivered different opinions: thus he had nothing, steady;
nothing permanent, whereby to guide his steps; like a blind man left to
himself in the streets, he was obliged to grope his way at the peril of
his existence. This will serve to shew the urgent necessity there is
for truth to throw its radiant lustre on systems big with so much
importance; that are so calculated to corroborate the animosities,
to confirm the bitterness of soul, between those whom nature intended
should always act as brothers.

By the magical charms with which these idols were surrounded, the human
species has remained either as if it was benumbed, in a state of stupid
apathy, or else he has become furious with fanaticism: sometimes,
desponding with fear, man cringed like a slave who bends under the
scourge of an inexorable master, always ready to strike him; he trembled
under a yoke made too ponderous for his strength: he lived in continual
dread of a vengeance he was unceasingly striving to appease, without
ever knowing when he had succeeded: as he was always bathed in tears,
continually enveloped in misery--as he was never permitted to lose sight
of his fears--as he was continually exhorted to nourish his alarm, he
could neither labour for his own happiness nor contribute to that of
others; nothing could exhilirate him; he became the enemy of himself,
the persecutor of his fellow-creatures, because his felicity here below
was interdicted; he passed his time in heaving the most bitter sighs;
his reason being forbidden him, he fell into either a state of infancy
or delirium, which submitted him to authority; he was destined to this
servitude from the hour he quitted his mother's womb, until that in
which he was returned to his kindred dust; tyrannical opinion bound him
fast in her massive fetters; a prey to the terrors with which he was
inspired, he appeared to have come upon the earth for no other purpose
than to dream--with no other desire than to groan--with no other motives
than to sigh; his only view seemed to be to injure himself; to deprive
himself of every rational pleasure, to embitter his own existence; to
disturb the felicity of others. Thus, abject, slothful, irrational, he
frequently became wicked, under the idea of doing honour to his gods;
because they instilled into his mind that it was his duty to avenge
their cause, to sustain their honour, to propagate their worship.

Mortals were prostrate from race to race, before vain idols to which
fear had given birth in the bosom of ignorance, during the calamities of
the earth; they tremblingly adored phantoms which credulity had placed
in the recesses of their own brain, where they found a sanctuary which
time only served to strengthen; nothing could undeceive them; nothing
was competent to make them feel, it was themselves they adored--that
they bent the knee before their own work--that they terrified themselves
with the extravagant pictures they had themselves delineated; they
obstinately persisted in prostrating themselves, in perplexing
themselves, in trembling; they even made a crime of endeavouring to
dissipate their fears; they mistook the production of their own folly;
their conduct resembled that of children, who having disfigured their
own features, become afraid of themselves when a mirror reflects the
extravagance they have committed. These notions so afflicting for
themselves, so grievous to others, have their epoch from the calamities
of man; they will continue, perhaps augment, until their mind,
enlightened by discarded reason, illumined by truth, shall set in
their true colours these various systems; until reflection guided by
experience, shall attach no more importance to them, than is consistent
with the happiness of society; until man, bursting the chains of
superstition--recalling to mind the great end of his existence--taking
a rational view of that which surrounds him, shall no longer refuse to
contemplate nature under her true character; shall no longer persist in
refusing to acknowledge she contains within herself the cause of that
wonderful phenomena which strikes on the dazzled optics of man: until
thoroughly persuaded of the weakness of their claim to the homage of
mankind, he shall make one pious, simultaneous, mighty effort, and
_overthrow the altars of Moloch and his priests_.





CHAP. IV.

_Examination of the Proofs of the Existence of the Divinity, as given by
CLARKE._


The unanimity of man in acknowledging the Divinity, is commonly looked
upon as the strongest proof of his existence. There is not, it is said,
any people on the earth who have not some ideas, whether true or false,
of an all-powerful agent who governs the world. The rudest savages
as well as the most polished nations, are equally obliged to recur
by thought to the first cause of every thing that exists; thus it
is affirmed, the cry of Nature herself ought to convince us of the
existence of the Godhead, of which she has taken pains to engrave the
notion in the minds of men: they therefore conclude, that the idea of
God is innate.

Perhaps there is nothing of which man should be more sedulously careful
than permitting a promiscuous assemblage of right with wrong--of
suffering false conclusions to be drawn from true propositions;
this will not improbably be found to be pretty much the case in this
instance; the existence of the great _Cause of causes_, the _Parent of
parents_, does not, I think, admit of any doubt in the mind of any
one who has reasoned: but, if this existence did not rest upon better
foundations than the unanimity of man on this subject, I am fearful
it would not be placed upon so solid a rock as those who make this
asseveration may imagine: the fact is, man is not generally agreed upon
this point; if he was, superstition could have no existence; the idea
of God cannot be _innate_, because, independent of the proofs offered on
every side of the almost impossibility of innate ideas, one simple fact
will set such an opinion for ever at rest, except with those who are
obstinately determined not to be convinced by even their own arguments:
if this idea was innate, it must be every where the same; seeing that
that which is antecedent to man's being, cannot have experienced the
modifications of his existence, which are posterior. Even if it were
waived, that the same idea should be expected from all mankind, but
that only every nation should have their ideas alike on this subject,
experience will not warrant the assertion, since nothing can be better
established than that the idea is not uniform even in the same town;
now this would be an insuperable quality in an innate idea. It not
unfrequently happens, that in the endeavour to prove too much, that
which stood firm before the attempt, is weakened; thus a bad advocate
frequently injures a good cause, although he may not be able to overturn
the rights on which it is rested. It would, therefore, perhaps, come
nearer to the point if it was said, "that the natural curiosity of
mankind have in all ages, and in all nations, led him to seek after the
primary cause of the phenomena he beholds; that owing to the variations
of his climate, to the difference of his organization, the greater
or less calamity he has experienced, the variety of his intellectual
faculties, and the circumstances under which he has been placed, man
has had the most opposite, contradictory, extravagant notions of the
Divinity, but that he has uniformly been in accord in acknowledging both
the existence, and the wisdom of his work--NATURE."

If disengaged from prejudice, we analyze this proof, we shall see that
the universal consent of man, so diffused over the earth, actually
proves little more than that he has been in all countries exposed to
frightful revolutions, experienced disasters, been sensible to sorrows
of which he has mistaken the physical causes; that those events to which
he has been either the victim or the witness, have called forth his
admiration or excited his fear; that for want of being acquainted with
the powers of nature, for want of understanding her laws, for want of
comprehending her infinite resources, for want of knowing the effects
she must necessarily produce under given circumstances, he has believed
these phenomena were due to some secret agent of which he has had vague
ideas--to beings whom he has supposed conducted themselves after his own
manner; who were operated upon by similar motives with himself.

The consent then of man in acknowledging a variety of gods, proves
nothing, except that in the bosom of ignorance he has either admired
the phenomena of nature, or trembled under their influence; that his
imagination was disturbed by what he beheld or suffered; that he has
sought in vain to relieve his perplexity, upon the unknown cause of
the phenomena he witnessed, which frequently obliged him to quake with
terror: the imagination of the human race has laboured variously upon
these causes, which have almost always been incomprehensible to him;
although every thing confessed his ignorance, his inability to define
these causes, yet he maintained that he was assured of their existence;
when pressed, he spoke of a spirit, (a word to which it was impossible
to attach any determinate idea) which taught nothing but the sloth,
which evidenced nothing but the stupidity of those who pronounced it.

It ought, however, not to excite any surprise that man is incapable of
forming any substantive ideas, save of those things which act, or which
have heretofore acted upon his senses; it is very evident that the
only objects competent to move his organs are material,--that none but
physical beings can furnish him with ideas,--a truth which has been
rendered sufficiently clear in the commencement of this work, not to
need any further proof. It will suffice therefore to say that the idea
of God is not an innate, but an acquired notion; that it is the very
nature of this notion to vary from age to age; to differ in one country
from another; to be viewed variously by individuals. What do I say?
It is, in fact, an idea hardly ever constant in the same mortal. This
diversity, this fluctuation, this change, stamps it with the true
character of an acquired opinion. On the other hand, the strongest proof
that can be adduced that these ideas are founded in error, is, that man
by degrees has arrived at perfectioning all the sciences which have any
known objects for their basis, whilst the science of theology has not
advanced; it is almost every where at the same point; men seem equally
undecided on this subject; those who have most occupied themselves with
it, have effected but little; they seem, indeed, rather to have rendered
the primitive ideas man formed to himself on this head more obscure,--to
have involved in greater mystery all his original opinions.

As soon as it is asked of man, what are the gods before whom he
prostrates himself, forthwith his sentiments are divided. In order that
his opinions should be in accord, it would be requisite that uniform
ideas, analogous sensations, unvaried perceptions, should every where
have given birth to his notions upon this subject: but this would
suppose organs perfectly similar, modified by sensations which have
a perfect affinity: this is what could not happen: because man,
essentially different by his temperament, who is found under
circumstances completely dissimilar, must necessarily have a great
diversity of ideas upon objects which each individual contemplates so
variously. Agreed in some general points, each made himself a god after
his own manner; he feared him, he served him, after his own mode. Thus
the god of one man, or of one nation, was hardly ever that of another
man, or of another nation. The god of a savage, unpolished people, is
commonly some material object, upon which the mind has exercised itself
but little; this god appears very ridiculous in the eyes of a more
polished community, whose minds have laboured more intensely upon the
subject. A spiritual god, whose adorers despise the worship paid by the
savage to a coarse, material object, is the subtle production of the
brain of thinkers, who, lolling in the lap of polished society quite at
their leisure, have deeply meditated, have long occupied themselves
with the subject. The theological god, although for the most part
incomprehensible, is the last effort of the human imagination; it is to
the god of the savage, what an inhabitant of the city of Sybaris, where
effiminacy and luxury reigned, where pomp and pageantry had reached
their climax, clothed with a curiously embroidered purple habit of silk,
was to a man either quite naked, or simply covered with the skin of
a beast perhaps newly slain. It is only in civilized societies, that
leisure affords the opportunity of dreaming--that ease procures the
facility of reasoning; in these associations, idle speculators meditate,
dispute, form metaphysics: the faculty of thought is almost void in the
savage, who is occupied either with hunting, with fishing, or with
the means of procuring a very precarious subsistence by dint of almost
incessant labour. The generality of men, however, have not more elevated
notions of the divinity, have not analyzed him more than the savage. A
spiritual, immaterial God, is formed only to occupy the leisure of some
subtle men, who have no occasion to labour for a subsistence. Theology,
although a science so much vaunted, considered so important to the
interests of man, is only useful to those who live at the expense of
others; or of those who arrogate to themselves the privilege of thinking
for all those who labour. This science becomes, in some polished
societies, who are not on that account more enlightened, a branch of
commerce extremely advantageous to its professors; equally unprofitable
to the citizens; above all when these have the folly to take a very
decided interest in their unintelligible system--in their discordant
opinions.

What an infinite distance between an unformed stone, an animal, a star,
a statue, and the abstracted Deity, which theology hath clothed with
attributes under which it loses sight of him itself! The savage without
doubt deceives himself in the object to which he addresses his vows;
like a child he is smitten with the first object that strikes his
sight--that operates upon him in a lively manner; like the infant, his
fears are alarmed by that from which he conceives he has either
received an injury or suffered disgrace; still his ideas are fixed by a
substantive being, by an object which he can examine by his senses. The
Laplander who adores a rock,--the negro who prostrates himself before
a monstrous serpent, at least see the objects they adore. The idolater
falls upon his knees before a statue, in which he believes there resides
some concealed virtue, some powerful quality, which he judges may be
either useful or prejudicial to himself; but that subtle reasoner,
called a metaphysician, who in consequence of his unintelligible
science, believes he has a right to laugh at the savage, to deride the
Laplander, to scoff at the negro, to ridicule the idolater, doth
not perceive that he is himself prostrate before a being of his own
imagination, of which it is impossible he should form to himself any
correct idea, unless, like the savage, he re-enters into visible nature,
to clothe him with qualities capable of being brought within the range
of his comprehension.

For the most part the notions on the Divinity, which obtain credit even
at the present day, are nothing more than a general terror diversely
acquired, variously modified in the mind of nations, which do not
tend to prove any thing, save that they have received them from their
trembling, ignorant ancestors. These gods have been successively
altered, decorated, subtilized, by those thinkers, those legislators,
those priests, who have meditated deeply upon them; who have prescribed
systems of worship to the uninformed; who have availed themselves
of their existing prejudices, to submit them to their yoke; who have
obtained a dominion over their mind, by seizing on their credulity,--by
making them participate in their errors,--by working on their fears;
these dispositions will always be a necessary consequence of man's
ignorance, when steeped in the sorrows of his heart.

If it be true, as asserted, that the earth has never witnessed any
nation so unsociable, so savage, to be without some form of religious
worship--who did not adore some god--but little will result from it
respecting the Divinity. The word GOD, will rarely be found to designate
more than the unknown cause of those effects which man has either
admired or dreaded. Thus, this notion so generally diffused, upon which
so much stress is laid; will prove little more than that man in all
generations has been ignorant of natural causes,--that he has been
incompetent, from some cause or other, to account for those phenomena
which either excited his surprise or roused his fears. If at the present
day a people cannot be found destitute of some kind of worship, entirely
without superstition, who do not acknowledge a God, who have not adopted
a theology more or less subtle, it is because the uninformed ancestors
of these people have all endured misfortunes--have been alarmed by
terrifying effects, which they have attributed to unknown causes--have
beheld strange sights, which they have ascribed to powerful agents,
whose existence they could not fathom; the details of which, together
with their own bewildered notions, they have handed down to their
posterity who have not given them any kind of examination.

It will readily be allowed, that the universality of an opinion by
no means proves its truth. Do we not see a great number of ignorant
prejudices, a multitude of barbarous errors, even at the present day,
receive the almost universal sanction of the human race? Are not nearly
all the inhabitants of the earth imbued with the idea of magic--in the
habit of acknowledging occult powers--given to divination--believers in
enchantment--the slaves to omens--supporters of witchcraft--thoroughly
persuaded of the existence of ghosts? If some of the most enlightened
persons are cured of these follies, they still find very zealous
partizans in the greater number of mankind, who accredit them with the
firmest confidence. It would not, however, be concluded by men of sound
sense, in many instances not by the theologian himself, that therefore
these chimeras actually have existence, although sanctioned with the
credence of the multitude. Before Copernicus, there was no one who did
not believe that the earth was stationary, that the sun described his
annual revolution round it. Was, however, this universal consent of
man upon a principle of astronomical science, which endured for so many
thousand years, less an error on that account? Yet to have doubted the
truth of such a generally-diffused opinion, one that had received
the sanction of so many learned men--that was clothed with the sacred
vestments of so many ages of credulity--that had been adopted by Moses,
acknowledged by Solomon, accredited by the Persian magi--that Elijah
himself had not refuted--that had obtained the fiat of the most
respectable universities, the most enlightened legislators, the wisest
kings, the most eloquent ministers; in short, a principle that embraced
all the stability that could be derived from the universal consent of
all ranks: to have doubted, I say, of this, would at one period have
been held as the highest degree of profanation, as the most presumptuous
scepticism, as an impious blasphemy, that would have threatened the very
existence of that unhappy country from whose unfortunate bosom such a
venomous, sacrilegious mortal could have arisen. It is well known what
opinion was entertained of Gallileo for maintaining the existence of the
antipodes. Pope Gregory excommunicated as atheists all those who gave it
credit. Thus each man has his God: But do all these gods exist? In reply
it will be said, somewhat triumphantly, each man hath his ideas of the
sun, do all these suns exist? However narrow may be the pass by which
superstition imagines it has thus guarded its favourite hypothesis,
nothing will perhaps be more easy than the answer: the existence of the
sun is a fact verified by the daily use of the senses; all the world see
the sun; no one bath ever said there is no sun; nearly all mankind have
acknowledged it to be both luminous and hot: however various may be the
opinions of man, upon this luminary, no one has ever yet pretended there
was more than one attached to our planetary system. But we may
perhaps be told, there is a wide difference between that which can be
contemplated by the visual organs, which can be understood by the sense
of feeling, and that which does not come under the cognizance of any
part of the organic structure of man. We must confess theology here
has the advantage; that we are unable to follow it through its devious
sinuosities; amidst its meandering labyrinths: but then it is the
advantage of those who see sounds, over those who only hear them; of
those who hear colours, over those who only see them; of the professors
of a science, where every thing is built upon laws inverted from those
common to the globe we inhabit; over those common understandings, who
cannot be sensible to any thing that does not give an impulse to some of
their organs.

If man, therefore, had the courage to throw aside his prejudices, which
every thing conspires to render as durable as himself--if divested
of fear he would examine coolly--if guided by reason he would
dispassionately view the nature of things, the evidence adduced
in support of any given doctrine; he would, at least, be under
the necessity to acknowledge, that the idea of the Divinity is not
innate--that it is not anterior to his existence--that it is
the production of time, acquired by communication with his own
species--that, consequently, there was a period when it did not actually
exist in him: he would see clearly, that he holds it by tradition from
those who reared him: that these themselves received it from their
ancestors: that thus tracing it up, it will be found to have been
derived in the last resort, from ignorant savages, who were our first
fathers. The history of the world will shew that crafty legislators,
ambitious tyrants, blood-stained conquerors, have availed themselves of
the ignorance, the fears, the credulity of his progenitors, to turn
to their own profit an idea to which they rarely attached any other
substantive meaning than that of submitting them to the yoke of their
own domination.

Without doubt there have been mortals who have dreamed they have seen
the Divinity. Mahomet, I believe, boasted he had a long conversation
with the Deity, who promulgated to him the system of the Mussulmans. But
are there not thousands, even of the theologians, who will exhaust their
breath, and fatigue their lungs with vociferating this man was a liar;
whose object was to take advantage of the simplicity, to profit by the
enthusiasm, to impose on the credulity of the Arabs; who promulgated
for truths, the crazy reveries of his own distempered imagination?
Nevertheless, is it not a truth, that this doctrine of the crafty Arab,
is at this day the creed of millions, transmitted to them by their
ancestors, rendered sacred by time, read to them in their mosques,
adorned with all the ceremonies of superstitious worship; of which the
inhabitants of a vast portion of the earth do not permit themselves for
an instant to doubt the veracity; who, on the contrary, hold those who
do not accredit it as dogs, as infidels, as beings of an inferior rank,
of meaner capacities than themselves? Indeed that man, even if he were
a theologian, would not experience the most gentle treatment from the
infuriated Mahometan, who should to his face venture to dispute the
divine mission of his prophet. Thus the ancestors of the Turk have
transmitted to their posterity, those ideas of the Divinity which they
manifestly received from those who deceived them; whose impositions,
modified from age to age, subtilized by the priests, clothed with
the reverential awe inspired by fear, have by degrees acquired that
solidity, received that corroboration, attained that veteran stability,
which is the natural result of public sanction, backed by theological
parade.

The word God is, perhaps, among the first that vibrate on the ear of
man; it is reiterated to him incessantly; he is taught to lisp it
with respect; to listen to it with fear; to bend the knee when it is
reverberated: by dint of repetition, by listening to the fables of
antiquity, by hearing it pronounced by all ranks and persuasions, he
seriously believes all men bring the idea with them into the world; he
thus confounds a mechanical habit with instinct; whilst it is for want
of being able to recal to himself the first circumstances under which
his imagination was awakened by this name; for want of recollecting all
the recitals made to him during the course of his infancy; for want of
accurately defining what was instilled into him by his education; in
short, because his memory does not furnish him with the succession of
causes that have engraven it on his brain, that he believes this idea
is really inherent to his being; innate in all his species. Iamblicus,
indeed, who was a Pythagorean philosopher not in the highest repute
with the learned world, although one of those visionary priests in some
estimation with theologians, (at least if we may venture to judge by the
unlimited draughts they have made on the bank of his doctrines) who
was unquestionably a favourite with the emperor Julian, says, "that
anteriorly to all use of reason, the notion of the gods is inspired
by nature, and that we have even a sort of feeling of the Divinity,
preferable to the knowledge of him." It is, however, uniformly by habit,
that man admires, that he fears a being, whose name he has attended to
from his earliest infancy. As soon as he hears it uttered, he without
reflection mechanically associates it with those ideas with which
his imagination has been filled by the recitals of others; with those
sensations which he has been instructed to accompany it. Thus, if for a
season man would be ingenuous with himself, he would concede that in
the greater number of his race, the ideas of the gods, and of those
attributes with which they are clothed, have their foundation,
take their rise in, are the fruit of the opinions of his fathers,
traditionally infused into him by education--confirmed by
habit--corroborated by example--enforced by authority. That it very
rarely happens he examines these ideas; that they are for the most part
adopted by inexperience, propagated by tuition, rendered sacred by time,
inviolable from respect to his progenitors, reverenced as forming part
of those institutions he has most learned to value. He thinks he has
always had them, because he has had them from his infancy; he
considers them indubitable, because he is never permitted to question
them--because he never has the intrepidity to examine their basis.

If it had been the destiny of a Brachman, or a Mussulman, to have drawn
his first breath on the shores of Africa, he would adore, with as much
simplicity, with as much fervour, the serpent reverenced by the Negroes,
as he does the God his own metaphysicians have offered to his reverence.
He would be equally indignant if any one should presumptuously dispute
the divinity of this reptile, which he would have learned to venerate
from the moment he quitted the womb of his mother, as the most zealous,
enthusiastic fakir, when the marvellous wonders of his prophet should
be brought into question; or as the most subtile theologian when
the inquiry turned upon the incongruous qualities with which he has
decorated his gods. Nevertheless, if this serpent god of the Negro
should be contested, they could not at least dispute his existence.
Simple as may be the mind of this dark son of nature, uncommon as may
be the qualities with which he has clothed his reptile, he still may be
evidenced by all who choose to exercise their organs of sight; not so
with the theologian; he absolutely questions the existence of every
other god but that which he himself has formed; which is questioned in
its turn by his brother metaphysician. They are by no means disposed to
admit the proofs offered by each other. Descartes, Paschal, and Doctor
Samuel Clarke himself, have been accused of atheism by the theologians
of their time. Subsequent reasoners have made use of their proofs, and
even given them as extremely valid. Doctor Bowman published a work, in
which he pretends all the proofs hitherto brought forward are crazy and
fragile: he of course substitutes his own; which in their turn have been
the subject of animadversion. Thus it would appear these theologians are
not more in accord with themselves than they are with Turks or Pagans.
They cannot even agree as to their proofs of existence: from age to
age new champions arise, new evidence is adduced, the old discarded, or
treated with contempt; profound philosophers, subtle metaphysicians, are
continually attacking each other for their ignorance on a point of the
very first importance. Amidst this variety of discussion, it is very
difficult for simple winds, for those who steadily search after truth,
who only wish to understand what they believe, to find a point upon
which they can fix with reliance--a standard round which they may rally
without fear of danger--a common measure that way serve them for a
beacon to avoid the quicksands of delusion--the sophistry of polemics.

Men of very great genius have successively miscarried in their
demonstrations; have been held to have betrayed their cause by the
weakness of the arguments by which they have supported it; by the manner
in which they have attempted to establish their positions. Thus many
of them, when they believed they had surmounted a difficulty, had the
mortification to find they had only given birth to an hundred others.
They seem, indeed, not to be in a capacity to understand each other,
or to agree among themselves, when they reason upon the nature and
qualities of beings created by such a variety of imaginations, which
each contemplates diversely, upon which the natural self-love of each
disputant induces him to reject with vehement indignation every thing
that does not fall in with his own peculiar mode of thinking--that does
not quadrate either with his superstition or his ignorance, or sometimes
with both.

The opponents of Clarke charge him with begging the question in his work
on _The Being and Attributes of God_. They say he has pretended to prove
this existence _a priori_, which they deem impossible, seeing there is
nothing anterior to the first of causes; that therefore it can only
be proved _a posteriori_, that is to say, by its effects. Law, in his
_Inquiry into the Ideas of Space, Time, Immensity, &c_. has attacked him
very triumphantly, for this manner of proof, which is stated to be so
very repugnant to the school-men. His arguments have been treated with
no more ceremony by Thomas D'Aquinas, John Scott, and others of the
schools. At the present day I believe he is held in more respect--that
his authority outweighs that of all his antagonists together. Be that as
it may, those who have followed him have done nothing more than either
repeat his ideas, or present his evidence under a new form. Tillotson
argues at great length, but it would be rather difficult to understand
which side of the question he adopts on this momentous subject; whether
he is a Necessitarian, or among the opposers of Fatalism. Speaking of
man, he says, "he is liable to many evils and miseries, which he can
neither prevent or redress; he is full of wants, which he cannot
supply, and compassed about with infirmities which he cannot remove, and
obnoxious to dangers which he can never sufficiently provide against: he
is apt to grieve for what he cannot help, and eagerly to desire what he
is never able to obtain." If the proofs of Clarke, who has drawn them up
in twelve propositions, are examined with attention, I think they may be
fairly shielded from the reproach with which they have been loaded;
it does not appear that he has proved his positions _a priori,_ but _a
posteriori,_ according to rule. It seems clear, however, that he has
mistaken the proof of the existence of the effects, for the proof of the
existence of the cause: but here he seems to have more reason than his
critics, who in their eagerness to prove that Clarke has not conformed
to the rules of the schools, would entirely overlook the best, the
surest foundation whereon to rest the existence of the _Great Cause of
causes,_ that _Parent of Parents_, whose wisdom shines so manifestly
in nature, of which Clarke's work may be said to be such a masterly
evidence. We shall follow, step by step, the different propositions
in which this learned divine developes the received opinions upon
the Divinity; which, when applied to nature, will be found to be so
accurate, so correct, as to leave no further room to doubt either the
existence or the wisdom of her great author, thus proved through her own
existence. Dr. Clarke sets out with saying:

"_1st. Something has existed from all eternity_."

This proposition is evident--hath no occasion for proofs. Matter has
existed from all eternity, its forms alone are evanescent; matter is the
great engine used by nature to produce all her phenomena, or rather it
is nature herself. We have some idea of matter, sufficient to warrant
the conclusion that this has always existed. First, that which exists,
supposes existence essential to its being. That which cannot, annihilate
itself, exists necessarily; it is impossible to conceive that that which
cannot cease to exist, or that which cannot annihilate itself, could
ever have had a beginning. If matter cannot be annihilated, it could
not commence to be. Thus we say to Dr. Clarke, that it is matter, it is
nature, acting by her own peculiar energy, of which no particle is ever
in an absolute state of rest, which hath always existed. The various
material bodies which this nature contains often change their form,
their combination, their properties, their mode of action: but their
principles or elements are indestructible--have never been able to
commence. What this great scholar actually understands, when he makes
the assertion "that an eternal duration is now actually past," is not
quite so clear; yet he affirms, "that not to believe it would be a real
and express contradiction." We may, however, safely admit his argument,
"that when once any proposition is clearly demonstrated to, be true,
it ought not to disturb us that there be perhaps some perplexing
difficulties on the other side, which merely for want of adequate ideas
of the manner of the existence of the things demonstrated, are not
easily to be cleared."

_2nd, "There has existed from eternity some one unchangeable and
independent Being."_

We may fairly inquire what is this Being? Is it independent of its own
peculiar essence, or of those properties which constitute it such as
it is? We shall further inquire, if this Being, whatever it may be,
can make the other beings which it produces, or which it moves, act
otherwise than they do, according to the properties which it has given
them? And in this case we shall ask, if this Being, such as it way be
supposed to be, does not act necessarily; if it is not obliged to employ
indispensible means to fulfil its designs, to arrive at the end which it
either has, or may be supposed to have in view? Then we shall say, that
nature is obliged to act after her essence; that every thing which takes
place in her is necessary; but that she is independent of her forms.

A man is said to be independent, when he is determined in his actions
only by the general causes which are accustomed to move him; he is
equally said to be dependent on another, when he cannot act but in
consequence of the determination which this last gives him. A body is
dependent on another body when it owes to it its existence, and its mode
of action. A being existing from eternity cannot owe his existence to
any other being; he cannot then be dependent upon him, except he owes
his action to him; but it is evident that an eternal or self-existent
Being contains in his own nature every thing that is necessary for him
to act: then, matter being eternal, is necessarily independent in the
sense we have explained; of course it hath no occasion for a mover upon
which it ought to depend.

This eternal Being is also immutable, if by this attribute be understood
that he cannot change his nature; but if it be intended to infer by it
that he cannot change his mode of action or existence, it is without
doubt deceiving themselves, since even in supposing an immaterial being,
they would be obliged to acknowledge in him different modes of being,
different volitions, different ways of acting; particularly if he was
not supposed totally deprived of action, in which case he would be
perfectly useless. Indeed it follows of course that to change his mode
of action he must necessarily change his manner of being. From hence it
will be obvious, that the theologians, in making their gods immutable,
render them immoveable, consequently they cannot act. An immutable
being, could evidently neither have successive volition, nor produce
successive action; if this being hath created matter, or given birth to
the universe, there must have been a time in which he was willing that
this matter, this universe, should exist; and this time must have been
preceded by another time, in which he was willing that it might not yet
exist. If God be the author of all things, as well as of the motion and
of the combinations of matter, he is unceasingly occupied in producing
and destroying; in consequence, he cannot be called immutable, touching
his mode of existing. The material world always maintains itself by
motion, and the continual change of its parts; the sum of the beings who
compose it, or of the elements which act in it, is invariably the same;
in this sense the immutability of the universe is much more easy of
comprehension, much more demonstrable than that of an other being to
whom, they would attribute all the effects, all the mutations which take
place. Nature is not more to be accused of mutability, on account of the
succession of its forms, than the eternal Being is by the theologians,
by the diversity of his decrees. Here we shall be able to perceive that,
supposing the laws by which nature acts to be immutable, it does not
require tiny of these logical distinctions to account for the changes
that take place: the mutation which results, is, on the contrary, a
striking proof of the immutability of the system which produces them;
and completely brings mature under the range of this second proposition
as stated by Dr. Clarke.

_3dly, "That unchangeable and independent Being which has existed
from eternity without any eternal cause of its existence, must be
self-existent, that is, necessarily existing."_

This proposition is merely a repetition of the first; we reply to it
by inquiring, Why matter, which is indestructible, should not be
self-existent? It is evident that a being who had no beginning, must be
self-existent; if he had existed by another, he would have commenced to
be; consequently he would not be eternal.

_4thly, "What the substance or essence of that Being which is
self-existent, or necessarily existing, is, we have no idea; neither is
it at all possible for us to comprehend it."_

Dr. Clarke would perhaps have spoken more correctly if he had said
his essence is impossible to be known: nevertheless, we shall readily
concede that the essence of matter is incomprehensible, or at least that
we conceive it very feebly by the manner in which we are affected by it;
but without this we should be less able to conceive the Divinity,
who would then be impervious on any side. Thus it must necessarily be
concluded, that it is folly to argue upon it, since it is by matter
alone we can have any knowledge of him; that is to say, by which we can
assure ourselves of his existence,--by which we can at all guess at his
qualities. In short we must conclude, that every thing related of the
Divinity, either proves him material, or else proves the impossibility
in which the human mind will always find itself, of conceiving any being
different from matter; without extent, yet omnipresent; immaterial,
yet acting upon matter; spiritual, yet producing matter; immutable, yet
putting every thing in activity, &c.

Indeed it must be allowed that the incomprehensibility of the Divinity
does not distinguish him from matter; this will not be more easy
of comprehension when we shall associate it with a being much less
comprehensible than itself; we have some slender knowledge of it through
some of its parts. We do not certainly know the essence of any being,
if by that word we are to understand that which constitutes its peculiar
nature. We only know matter by the sensations, the perceptions, the
ideas which it furnishes; it is according to these that we judge it
to be either favorable or unfavourable, following the particular
disposition of our organs. But when a being does not act upon any part
of our organic structure, it does not exist for us; we cannot, without
exhibiting folly, without betraying our ignorance, without falling into
obscurity, either speak of its nature, or assign its qualities; our
senses are the only channel by which we could have formed the slightest
idea of it; these not having received any impulse, we are, in point of
fact, unacquainted with its existence. The incomprehensibility of the
Divinity ought to convince man that it is a point at which he is bound
to stop; indeed he is placed in a state of utter incapacity to proceed:
this, however, would not suit with those speculators who are willing to
reason upon him continually, to shew the depth of their learning,--to
persuade the uninformed they understand that which is incomprehensible
to all men; by which they expect to be able to submit him to their own
views. Nevertheless, if the Divinity be incomprehensible, It would not
be straining a point beyond its tension, to conclude that a priest, or
metaphysician, did not comprehend him better than other men: it is not,
perhaps, either the wisest or the surest way to become acquainted with
him, to represent him to ourselves, by the imagination of a theologian.

_5thly, "Though the substance, or essence of the self-existent Being, is
in itself absolutely incomprehensible to us, yet many of the essential
attributes of his nature are strictly demonstrable, as well as his
existence. Thus, in the first place, the self-existent Being must of
necessity be eternal."_

This proposition differs in nothing from the first, except Dr. Clarke
does not here understand that as the self-existent Being had no
beginning, he can have no end. However this may be, we must ever
inquire, Why this should not be matter? We shall further observe,
that matter not being capable of annihilation, exists necessarily,
consequently will never cease to exist; that the human mind has no means
of conceiving how matter should originate from that which is not itself
matter: is it not obvious, that matter is necessary; that there is
nothing, except its powers, its arrangement, its combinations, which are
contingent or evanescent? The general motion is necessary, but the
given motion is not so; only during the season that the particular
combinations subsist, of which this motion is the consequence, or
the effect: we may be competent to change the direction, to either
accelerate or retard, to suspend or arrest, a particular motion, but the
general motion can never possibly be annihilated. Man, in dying, ceases
to live; that is to say, he no longer either walks, thinks, or acts in
the mode which is peculiar to human organization: but the matter which
composed his body, the matter which formed his mind, does not cease to
move on that account: it simply becomes susceptible of another species
of motion.

_6thly, "The self-existent Being must of necessity be infinite and
omnipresent."_

The word infinite presents only a negative idea--which excludes all
bounds: it is evident that a being who exists necessarily, who is
independent, cannot be limited by any thing which is out of himself;
he must consequently be his own limits; in this sense we may say he is
infinite.

Touching what is said of his omnipresence, it is equally evident that
if there be nothing exterior to this being, either there is no place in
which he must not be present, or that there will be only himself and the
vacuum. This granted, I shall inquire if matter exists; if it does
not at least occupy a portion of space? In this case, matter, or the
universe, must exclude every other being who is not matter, from that
place which the material beings occupy in space. In asking whether the
gods of the theologians be by chance the abstract being which they call
the vacuum or space, they will reply, no! They will further insist, that
their gods, who are not matter, penetrate that which is matter. But it
must be obvious, that to penetrate matter, it is necessary to have some
correspondence with matter, consequently to have extent; now to have
extent, is to have one of the properties of matter. If the Divinity
penetrates matter, then he is material; by a necessary deduction he is
inseparable from matter; then if he is omnipresent, he will be in every
thing. This the theologian will not allow: he will say it is a mystery;
by which I shall understand that he is himself ignorant how to account
for his own positions; this will not be the case with making nature act
after immutable laws; she will of necessity be every where, in my body,
in my arm, in every other material being, because matter composes them
all. The Divinity who has given this invariable system, will without
any incongruous reasoning, without any subterfuge, be also present every
where, inasmuch as the laws he has prescribed will unchangeably act
through the whole; this does not seem inconsistent with reason to
suppose.

_7th, "The Self-existent Being must of necessity be but one."_

If there he nothing exterior to a being who exists necessarily, it must
follow that he is unique. It will be obvious that this proposition is
the same with the preceding one; at least, if they are not willing to
deny the existence of the material world.

_8th, "The self-existent and original Cause of all things, must be an
intelligent being."_

Here Dr. Clarke most unquestionably assigneth a human quality:
intelligence is a faculty appertaining to organized or animated beings,
of which we have no knowledge out of these beings. To have intelligence,
it is necessary to think; to think, it is requisite to have ideas; to
have ideas, supposes senses; when senses exist they are material; when
they are material, they cannot be a pure spirit, in the language of the
theologian.

The necessary Being who comprehends, who contains, who produces animated
beings, contains, includes, and produceth intelligence. But has the
great whole a peculiar intelligence, which moveth it, which maketh
it act, which determineth it in the mode that intelligence moves and
determines animated bodies; or rather, is not this intelligence the
consequence of immutable laws, a certain modification resulting from
certain combinations of matter, which exists under one form of these
combinations, but is wanting under another form? This is assuredly what
nothing is competent absolutely, and demonstrably to prove. Man having
placed himself in the first rank in the universe, has been desirous to
judge of every thing after what he saw within himself, because he
hath pretended that in order to be perfect it was necessary to be
like himself. Here is the source of all his erroneous reasoning upon
nature--the foundation of his ideas upon his gods. He has therefore
concluded, perhaps not with the most polished wisdom, that it would be
indecorous in himself, injurious to the Divinity, not to invest him with
a quality which is found estimable in man--which he prizes highly--to
which he attaches the idea of perfection--which he considers as a
manifest proof of superiority. He sees his fellow-creature is offended
when he is thought to lack intelligence; he therefore judges it to be
the same with the Divinity. He denies this quality to nature, because
he considers her a mass of ignoble matter, incapable of self-action;
although she contains and produces intelligent beings. But this is
rather a personification of an abstract quality, than an attribute of
the Deity, with whose perfections, with whose mode of existence, he
cannot by any possible means become acquainted according to the fifth
proposition of Dr. Clarke himself. It is in the earth that is engendered
those living animals called worms; yet we do not say the earth is a
living creature. The bread which man eats, the wine that he drinks, are
not themselves thinking substances; yet they nourish, sustain, and cause
those beings to think, who are susceptible of this modification of
their existence. It is likewise in nature, that is formed intelligent,
feeling, thinking beings; yet it cannot be rationally said, that nature
feels, thinks, and is intelligent after the manner of these beings, who
nevertheless spring out of her bosom.

How! cries the metaphysician, the subtilizing philosopher, what! refuse
to the Divinity, those qualities we discover in his creatures? Must,
then, the work be more perfect than the workman? Shall God, who made the
eye, not himself see? Shall God, who formed the ear, not himself hear!
This at a superficial view appears insuperable: but are the questioners,
however triumphantly they may make the inquiry, themselves aware of the
length this would carry them, even if their queries were answered with
the most unqualified affirmative? Have they sufficiently reflected
on the tendency of this mode of reasoning? If this be admitted as a
postulatum, are they prepared to follow it in all its extent? Suppose
their argument granted, what is to be done with all those other
qualities upon which man does not set so high a value? Are they also
to be ascribed to the Divinity, because we do not refuse him qualities
possessed by his creatures? By a parity of reasoning we should attach
faculties that would be degrading to the Divinity. Thus it ever happens
with those who travel out of the limits of their own knowledge; they
involve themselves in perpetual contradictions which they can never
reconcile; which only serve to prove that in arguing upon points, on
which universal ignorance prevails, the result is constantly that all
the deductions made from such unsteady principles, must of necessity be
at war with each other, in hostility with themselves. Thus, although
we cannot help feeling the profound wisdom, that must have dictated the
system we see act with such uniformity, with such constancy, with
such astonishing power, we cannot form the most slender idea of the
particular nature of that wisdom; because if we were for an instant to
assimilate it to our own, weak and feeble as it is, we should from that
instant be in a state of contradiction; seeing we could not then
avoid considering the evil we witness, the sorrow we experience, as a
dereliction of this wisdom, which at least proves one great truth, _that
we are utterly incapable of forming an idea of the Divinity_. But in
contemplating things as our own experience warrants in whatever we do
understand, in considering nature as acting by unchangeable laws, we
find good and evil necessarily existing, without at all involving the
wisdom of the great _Cause of causes_; who thus has no need to remedy
that, which the further progress of the eternal system will regulate of
itself, or which industry and patient research on our parts will enable
us to discover the means of futurely avoiding.

_9th, "The self-existent and original Cause of all things, is not a
necessary agent, but a being endued with liberty and choice._"

Man is called free, when he finds within himself motives that determine
him to action, or when his will meets no obstacle to the performance of
that to which his motives have determined him. The necessary Being of
which question is here made, doth he find no obstacles to the execution
of the projects which are attributed to him? Is he willing, adopting
their own hypothesis, that evil should be committed, or can he not
prevent it? In this latter case he is not free; if his will does meet
with obstacles, if he is willing to permit evil; then he suffers man
to restrain his liberty, by deranging his projects; if he has not these
projects, then they are themselves in error who ascribe them to him.
How will the metaphysicians draw themselves out of this perplexing
intricacy?

The further a theologian goes, whilst considering his gods as
possessed of human qualities, as acting by mortal motives, the more he
flounders--the greater the mass of contradiction he heaps together:
thus if it be asked of him, can God reward crime, punish virtue, he will
immediately answer, no! In this answer he will have truth: but then this
truth, and the freedom which is ascribed to him, cannot, according to
human ideas, exist together; because if this being cannot love vice,
cannot hate virtue, and it is evident he cannot, he is in fact not more
free than man himself. Again, God is said to have made a covenant with
his creatures; now it is the very essence of a covenant to restrict
choice; and that being must be considered a necessary agent who is
under the necessity of fulfilling any given act. As it is impossible to
suppose the Divinity can act irrationally, it must be conceded that as
he made these laws, he is himself obliged to follow them: because if he
was not, as we must again suppose he does nothing without a good reason,
he would thereby imply, that the mode of action he adopted would be
wiser; which would again involve a contradiction. The theologians
fearing, without doubt, to restrain the liberty of the Divinity, have
supposed it was necessary that he should not be bound by his own laws,
in which they have shewn somewhat more ignorance of their subject than
they imagined.

_10th, "The self-existent Being, the supreme Cause of all things, must
of necessity have infinite power."_

As nature is adequate to produce every thing we see--as she contains
the whole united power of the universe, her power has consequently no
limits: the being who conferred this power cannot have less. But if the
ideas of the theologians were adopted, this power would not appear
quite so unlimited; since, according to them, man is a free agent,
consequently has the means of acting contrary to this power, which at
once sets a boundary to it. An equitable monarch is perhaps nothing
less than he is a free agent; when he believes himself bound to act
conformably to the laws, which he has sworn to observe, or which he
cannot violate without wounding his justice. The theologian is a man who
may be very fairly estimated neuter; because he destroys with one hand
what he establishes with the other.

_11th, "The Supreme Cause and Author of all things, must of necessity be
infinitely wise."_

As nature produces all things by certain immutable laws, it will require
no great difficulty to allow that she may be infinitely wise: indeed,
whatever side of the argument may be taken, this fact will result as
a necessary consequence. It will hardly admit of a question that all
things are produced by nature: if, therefore, we do not allow her wisdom
to be first rate, it would be an insult to the Divinity, who gave her
her system. If the theologian himself is to take the lead, he also
admits that nature operates under the immediate auspices of his gods;
whatever she does, must then, according to his own shewing, be executed
with the most polished wisdom. But the theologian is not satisfied with
going thus far: he will insist, not only that he knows what these
things are, but also that he knows the end they have in view: this,
unfortunately, is the rock he splits upon. According to his own
admission, the ways of God are impenetrable to man. If we grant his
position, what is the result? Why, that it is at random he speaks. If
these ways are impenetrable, by what means did he acquire his knowledge
of them? How did he discover the end proposed by the Deity? If they
are not impenetrable, they then can be equally known to other men as
to himself. The theologian would be puzzled to shew he has any more
privileges in nature than his fellow mortals. Again, if he has asserted
these things to be impenetrable, when they are not so, he is then in the
situation that he has himself placed Mahomet: he is no longer worthy of
being attended to, because he has swerved from veracity. It certainly is
not very consistent with the sublime idea of the Divinity that he should
be clothed with that weak, vain passion of man, called glory: the being
who had the faculty of producing such a system as it operated in nature,
could hardly be supposed to have such a frivolous passion as we know
this to be in our fellows: and as we can never reason but after what
we do know, it would appear nothing can be more inconsistent than thus
continually heaping together our own feeble, inconsistent views, and
then supposing the great _Cause of causes_ acts by such futile rules.

_12th, "The supreme Cause and Author of all things must of necessity be
a being of infinite goodness, justice, and truth, and all other moral
perfections, such as become the supreme governor and judge of the
world."_

We must again repeat that these are human qualities drawn from the model
of man himself; they only suppose a being of the human species, who
should be divested of what we call imperfections: this is certainly
the highest point of view in which our finite minds are capable of
contemplating the Divinity: but as this being has neither species nor
cause, consequently no fellow creatures, he must necessarily be of
an order so different to man, that human faculties can in no wise
be appropriately assigned to him. The idea of perfection, as man
understands it, is an abstract, metaphysical, negative idea, of which
he has no archetype whereby to form a judgment: he would call that a
perfect being, who, similar to himself, was wanting in those qualities
which he finds prejudicial to him; but such a being would after all be
no wore than a man. It is always relatively to himself, to his own mode
of feeling and of thinking, that a thing is either perfect or imperfect;
it is according to this, that in his eyes a thing is more or less useful
or prejudicial; agreeable or disagreeable. Justice includes all moral
perfections. One of the most prominent features of justice, in the
ideas of man, is the equity of the relations subsisting between beings,
founded upon their mutual wants. According to the theologian, his gods
owe nothing to man. How then does he measure out his ideas of justice?
For a monarch to say he owed nothing to his subjects, would be
considered, even by this theologian himself, as rank injustice;
because he would expect the fulfilment of duties on their part, without
exercising those which devolved upon himself. Duties, according to
the only idea man can form of them, must be reciprocal. It is rather
stretching the human capabilities, to understand the relations between
a pure spirit and material beings--between finity and infinity--between
eternal beings and those which are transitory: thus it is, that
metaphysics hold forth an inconceivable being by the very attributes
with which they clothe him; for either he has these attributes, or
he has them not: whether he has them or has them not, man can only
understand them after his own powers of comprehension. If he does at
all understand them, he cannot have the slightest idea of justice
unaccompanied by duties, which are the very basis, the superstructure,
the pillars upon which this virtue rests. Whether we are to view it as
self-love or ignorance in the theologian, that he thus dresses up his
gods after himself, it certainly was not the happiest effort of his
imagination to work by an inverse rule: for, according to himself,
the qualities he describes are all the negation of what he calls them.
Doctor Clarke himself stumbles a little upon these points; he insists
upon free agency, and uses this extraordinary method to support his
argument; he says, "God is, by necessity, a free agent: and he can no
more possibly cease to be so, than he can cease to exist. He must of
necessity, every moment choose to act, or choose to forbear acting;
because two contradictories cannot possibly be true at once. Man also
is by necessity, not in the nature of things, but through God's
appointment, a free agent. And it is no otherwise in his power to cease
to be such, than by depriving himself of life." Will Doctor Clarke
permit us to put one simple question: If to be obligated to do a
certain given thing, is to be free, what is it to be coerced? Or if two
contradictories cannot be true at once, by what rule of logic are we
to measure the idea of that freedom which arises out of necessity.
Supposing necessity to be what Dr. Johnson, (using Milton as his
authority) says it is, "compulsion," "fatality," would it be considered
a man was less restrained in his actions because he was only compelled
to do what was right? The restraint would undoubtedly he beneficial to
him, but it would not therefore render him more a free agent. If the
Divinity cannot love wickedness, cannot hate goodness, (and surely
the theologians themselves will not pretend he can,) then the power of
choice has no existence as far as these two things are concerned; and
this upon Clarke's own principle, because two contradictories cannot be
true at once. Nothing could, I think, appear a greater contradiction,
than the idea that the _Great Cause of causes_ could by any possibility
love vice: if such a monstrous principle could for a moment have
existence, there would be an end of all the foundations of religion.

The Doctor is very little happier in reasoning upon _immateriality_.
He says, by way of illustrating his argument, "that it is possible to
infinite power to create an immaterial cogitative substance, endued
with a power of beginning motion, and with a liberty of will or choice."
Again, "that immaterial substances are not impossible; or, that a
substance immaterial is not a contradictory notion. Now, whoever asserts
that it is contradictory, must affirm that whatever is not matter is
nothing; and that, to say any thing exists which is not matter, is
saying that there exists something which is nothing, which in other
words is plainly this,--that whatever we have not an idea of, is
nothing, and impossible to be." It could, I am apt to believe, never
have entered into any reasonable mind that a thing was impossible
because he could have no idea of it:--many things, on the contrary, are
possible, of which we have not the most slender notion: but it does
not, I presume, flow consecutively out of this admission, that therefore
every thing is, which is not impossible. Doctor Clarke then, rather begs
the question on this occasion. In the schools it is never considered
requisite to prove a negative; indeed, this is ranked by logicians
amongst those things impossible to be, but it is considered of
the highest importance to soundness of argument, to establish the
affirmative by the most conclusive reasoning. Taking this for granted,
we will apply the doctor's own reasoning. He says, "Nothing is that of
which every thing, can truly be affirmed. So that the idea of nothing,
if I may so speak, is absolutely the negative of all ideas; the idea,
therefore, either of a finite or infinite nothing is a contradiction
in terms." To affirm, of a thing with truth, it must be necessary to be
acquainted with that thing. To have ideas, as we have already proved, it
is necessary to have perceptions; to have perceptions, it is requisite
to have sensations; to have sensations, requires organs. An idea cannot
be, and not be, at the same moment: the idea of substance, it will
scarcely be denied, is that of a thing solid, real, according to Dryden;
capable of supporting accidents, according to Watts; something of which
we can say that it is, according to Davies; body, corporeal nature,
according to Newton; the idea of immaterial, according to Hooker, is
incorporeal. How then am I to understand immaterial substance? Is it
not, according to these definitions, that which cannot couple together?
If a thing be immaterial, it cannot be a substance; if a substance, it
cannot be immaterial: those I apprehend will not have many ideas, who do
not see this is a complete negative of all ideas. If, therefore, on the
outset, the doctor cannot find words, by which he can convey the idea of
that of which he is so desirous to prove the existence, by what chain of
reasoning does he flatter himself that he is to be understood? He will
endeavour to draw out of this dilemma, by assuring as there are things
which we can neither see nor touch, but which do not the less exist on
that account. Granted: but from thence we can neither reason upon
them, nor assign them qualities; we must at least either feel them or
something like them, before we can have any idea of them: this, however,
would not prove they were not substances, nor that substances can be
immaterial. A thing may with great possibility exist of which we have no
knowledge, and yet be material; but I maintain until we have a knowledge
of it, it exists not for us, any more than colours exist for a man born
blind; the man who has sight knows they do exist, can describe them to
his dark neighbour; from this description the blind man may form some
idea of them by analogy with what he himself already knows; or, perhaps,
having a finer tact than his neighbour, he may be enabled to distinguish
them by their surfaces; it would, therefore, be bad reasoning in the
man born blind, to deny the existence of colours; because although these
colours may have no relation with the senses in the absence of sight,
they have with those who have it in their power to see and to know
them: this blind man, however, would-appear a little ridiculous if he
undertook to define them with all their gradations of shade; with all
their variations under different masses of light. Again, if those who
were competent to discriminate these modifications of matter called
colours, were to define them to this blind man, as those modifications
of matter called sound, would the blind man be able to have any
conception of them? It certainly would not be wise in him to aver, that
such a thing as colorific sound had no existence, was impossible; but
at least he would be very justifiable in saying, they appeared
contradictions, because he had some ideas of sound which did not at
all aid him in forming those of colour; he would not, perhaps, be very
inconclusive if he suspected the competency of his informer to the
definition attempted, from his inability to convey to him in any
distinct, understood terms, his own ideas of colours. The theologian is
a blind man, who would explain to others who are also blind, the shades
and colours of a portrait whose original he has not even stumbled upon
in the dark. There is nothing incongruous in supposing that every thing
which has existence is matter; but it requires the complete inversion of
all our ideas, to conceive that which is immaterial; because, in point
of fact, this would be a quality of which "nothing can with truth be
affirmed."

It is, indeed true, that Plato, who was a great creator of chimeras,
says, "those who admit nothing but what they can see and feel, are
stupid ignorant beings, who refuse to admit the reality of the existence
of invisible things." With all due deference to such an authority, we
may still venture to ask, is there then no difference, no shade, no
gradation, between an admission of possibilities and the proof of
realities. Theology would then be the only science in which it is
permitted to conclude that a thing is, as soon as it is possible to be.
Will the assertion of either Clarke or Plato stand absolutely in place
of all evidence? Would they themselves permit such to be convincing if
used against them? The theologians evidently hold this Platonic, this
dogmatical language; they have dreamed the dreams of their master;
perhaps if they were examined a little, they would be found nothing
more than the result of those obscure notions, those unintelligible
metaphysics, adopted by the Egyptian, Chaldean, and Assyrian priests,
among whom Plato drew up his philosophy. If, however, philosophy means
that which we are led to suppose it does, by the great John Locke, it is
"a system by which natural effects are explained." Taken in this sense
we shall be under the necessity of agreeing, that the Platonic doctrines
in no wise merit this distinction, seeing he has only drawn the human
mind from the contemplation of visible nature, to plunge it into the
unfathomable depths of invisibility--of intangibility--of suppositious
speculation, where it can find little other food except chimeras or
conjecture. Such a philosophy is rather fantastical, yet it would seem
we are required to subscribe to its positions without being allowed
to compare them with reason, to examine them through the medium of
experience, to try the gold by the action of fire: thus we have in
abundance the terms spirits, incorporeal substances, invisible powers,
supernatural effects, innate ideas, mysterious virtues, possessed by
demons, &c. &c. which render our senses entirely useless, which put
to flight every thing like experience; while we are gravely told that
"nothing is that, of which no thing can truly be affirmed." Whoever may
be willing to take the trouble of reading the works of Plato and his
disciples, such as Proclus, Iamblicus, Plotinus, and others, will not
fail to find in them almost every doctrine, every metaphysical
subject of the theologian; in fact, the theurgy of many of the modern
superstitions, which for the most part seems to be little more than a
slight variation of that adopted by the ethnic priests. Dreamers have
not had that variety in their follies, that has generally been imagined.
That some of these things should be extensively admitted, by no means
affords proof of their existence. Nothing appears more facile than to
make mankind admit the greatest absurdities, under the imposing name
of mysteries; after having imbued him from his infancy with maxims
calculated to hoodwink his reason--to lead him astray--to prevent him
from examining that which he is told he must believe. Of this there
cannot well exist a more decisive proof than the great extent of
country, the millions of human beings who faithfully and without
examination have adopted the idle dreams, the rank absurdities, of that
arch impostor Mahomet. However this may be, we shall be obliged again
to reply to Plato, and to those of his followers who impose upon us the
necessity of believing that which we cannot comprehend, that, in order
to know that a thing exists, it is at least necessary to have some idea
of it; that this idea can only come to us by the medium of our senses;
that consequently every thing of which our senses do not give us a
knowledge, is in fact nothing for us; and can only rest upon our faith;
upon that admission which is pretty generally, even by the theologian
himself, considered as rather a sandy foundation whereon to erect the
altar of truth: that if there be an absurdity in not accrediting the
existence of that which we do not know, there is no less extravagance in
assigning it qualities; in reasoning upon its properties; in clothing
it with faculties, which may or may not be suitable to its mode of
existence; in substituting idols of our own creation; in combining
incompatible attributes, which will neither bear the test of experience
nor the scrutiny of reason; and then endeavouring to make the whole pass
current by dint of the word infinite, which we will now examine.

Infinite, according to Dennis, means "boundless, unlimited." Doctor
Clarke thus describes it:--he says, "The self-existent being must be a
most simple, unchangeable incorruptible being; without parts, figure,
motion, divisibility, or any other such properties as we find in matter.
For all these things do plainly and necessarily imply finiteness in
their very notion, and are utterly inconsistent with complete infinity."
Ingenuously, is it possible for man to form any true notion of such a
quality? The theologians themselves acknowledge he cannot. Further, the
Doctor allows, "That as to the particular manner of his being infinite,
or every where present, in opposition to the manner of created things
being present in such or such finite places, this is as impossible for
our finite understandings to comprehend or explain, as it is for us to
form an adequate idea of infinity." What is this, then, but that which
no man can explain or comprehend? If it cannot be comprehended, it
cannot be detailed; if it cannot be detailed, it is precisely "that of
which nothing can with truth be affirmed;" and this is Dr. Clarke's own
explanation of nothing. Indeed, is not the human mind obliged by its
very nature to join limited quantities to other quantities, which it can
only conceive as limited, in order to form to itself a sort of confused
idea of something beyond its own grasp, without ever reaching the point
of infinity, which eludes every attempt at definition? Then it would
appear that it is an abstraction, a mere negation of limitation.

Our learned adversary seems to think it strange that the existence of
incorporeal, immaterial substances, the essence of which we are not
able to comprehend, should not be generally accredited. To enforce
this belief, he says, "There is not so mean and contemptible a plant
or animal, that does not confound the most enlarged understanding, upon
earth: nay, even the simplest and plainest of all inanimate beings
have their essence or substance hidden from us in the deepest and most
impenetrable obscurity."

We shall reply to him,

_First_, That the idea of an immaterial substance; or being without
extent, is only an absence of ideas, a negation of extent, as we have
already shewn; that when we are told a being is not matter, they speak
to us of that which is not, and do not teach us that which is; because
by insisting that a being is such, that it cannot act upon any of our
senses, they, in fact, inform us that we have no means of assuring
ourselves whether such being exists or not.

_Secondly_, We shall avow without the least hesitation, that men of the
greatest genius, of the most indefatigable research, are not acquainted
with the essence of stones, plants, animals, nor with the secret springs
which constitute some, which make others vegetate or act: but then at
least we either feel them or see them; our senses have a knowledge of
them in some respects; we can perceive some of their effects; we have
something whereby to judge of them, either accurately or inaccurately;
we can conceive that which is matter, however varied, however subtle,
however minute, by analogy with other matter; but our senses cannot
compass that which is immaterial on any side; we cannot by any possible
means understand it; we have no means whatever of ascertaining its
existence; consequently we cannot even form an idea of it; such a being
is to us an occult principle, or rather a being which imagination has
composed, by deducting from it every known quality. If we are ignorant
of the intimate combination of the most material beings, we at least
discover, with the aid of experience, some of their relations with
ourselves: we have a knowledge of their surface, their extent, their
form, their colour, their softness, their density; by the impressions
they make on our senses, we are capable of discriminating them--of
comparing them--of judging of them in some manner--of seeing them--of
either avoiding or courting them, according to the different modes in
which we are affected by them; we cannot apply any of these tests to
immaterial beings; to spirits; neither can those men who are unceasingly
talking to mankind of these inconceivable things.

_Thirdly_, We have a consciousness of certain modifications in
ourselves, which we call sentiment, thought, will, passions: for want
of being acquainted with our own peculiar essence; for want of precisely
understanding the energy of our own particular organization, we
attribute these effects to a concealed cause, distinguished from
ourselves; which the theologians call a spiritual cause, inasmuch as
it appears to act differently from our body. Nevertheless, reflection,
experience, every thing by which we are enabled to form any kind of
judgment, proves that material effects can only emanate from material
causes. We see nothing in the universe but physical, material effects,
these can only be produced by analogous causes; it is, then certainly
more rational to attribute them to nature herself, of which we may know
something, if we will but deign to meditate her with attention, rather
than to spiritual causes, of which we must for ever remain ignorant, let
us study them as long as we please.

If incomprehensibility be not a sufficient reason for absolutely denying
the possibility of immateriality, it certainly is not of a cogency
to establish its existence; we shall always be less in a capacity
to comprehend a spiritual cause, than one that is material; because
materiality is a known quality; spirituality is an occult, an unknown
quality; or rather it is a mode of speech of which we avail ourselves
to throw a veil over our own ignorance. We are repeatedly told that our
senses only bring us acquainted with the external of things; that our
limited ideas are not capable of conceiving immaterial beings: we agree
frankly to this position; but then our senses do not even shew us the
external of these immaterial substances, Which the theologians will
nevertheless attempt to define to us; upon which they unceasingly
dispute among themselves; upon which even until this day they are not
in perfect unison with each other. The great John Locke in his familiar
letters, says, "I greatly esteem all those who faithfully defend their
opinions; but there are so few persons who, according to the manner they
do defend them, appear fully convinced of the opinions they profess,
that I am tempted to believe there are more sceptics in the world than
are generally imagined."

Abady, one of the most strenuous supporters of immaterialism, says, "The
question is not what incorporeity is, but whether it be." To settle this
disputable point, it were necessary to have some data whereon to form
our judgment; but how assure ourselves of the existence of that, of
which we shall never be competent to have a knowledge? If we are not
told what this is; if some tangible evidence be not offered to the human
mind; how shall we feel ourselves capacitated to judge whether or not
its existence be even possible? How form an estimate of that picture
whose colours elude our sight, whose design we cannot perceive, whose
features have no means of becoming familiar to our mind, whose very
canvas refuses itself to our all research, of which the artist himself
can afford no other idea, no other description, but that it is, although
he himself can neither shew us how or where! We have seen the ruinous
foundations upon which men have hitherto erected this fanciful idea of
immateriality; we have examined the proofs which they have offered,
if proofs they can be called, in support of their hypothesis; we have
sifted the evidence they have been willing to have accredited, in
order to establish their position; we have pointed out the numberless
contradictions that result from their want of union on this subject,
from the irreconcileable qualities with which they clothe their
imaginary system. What conclusion, then, ought fairly, rationally,
consistently, to be drawn from the whole? Can we, or can we not admit
their argument to be conclusive, such as ought to be received by beings
who think themselves sane? Will it allow any other inference than that
it has no existence; that immateriality is a quality hitherto unproved;
the idea of which the mind of man has no means of compassing? Still they
will insist, "there are no contradictions between the qualities which
they attribute to these immaterial substances; but there is a difference
between the understanding of man and the nature of these substances."
This granted, are they nearer the point at which they labour? What
standard is it necessary man should possess, to enable him to judge
of these substances? Can they shew the test that will lead to an
acquaintance with them? Are not those who have thus given loose to their
imagination, who have given birth to this system, themselves men? Does
not the disproportion, of which they speak with such amazing confidence,
attach to themselves as well as to others? If it needs an infinite
mind to comprehend infinity--to form an idea of incorporeity--can the
theologian himself boast he is in a capacity to understand it? To what
purpose then is it they speak of these things to others? Why do they
attempt descriptions of that which they allow to be indescribable? Man,
who will never be an infinite being, will never be able to conceive
infinity; if, then, he has hitherto been incompetent to this perfection
of knowledge, can he reasonably flatter himself he will ever obtain it;
can he hope under any circumstances to conquer that which according to
the shewing of all is unconquerable?

Nevertheless it is pretended, that it is absolutely necessary to know
these substances: but how prove the necessity of having a knowledge of
that which is impossible to be known? We are then told that good sense
and reason are sufficient to convince us of its existence: this is
taking new ground, when the old has been found untenable: for we are
also told that reason is a treacherous guide; one that frequently leads
us astray; that in religious matters it ought not to prevail: at least
then they ought to shew us the precise time when we must resume this
reason. Shall we consult it again, when the question is, whether what
they relate is probable; whether the discordant qualities which they
unite are consistently combined; whether their own arguments have all
that solidity which they would themselves wish them to possess? But we
have strangely mistaken them if they are willing that we should recur to
it upon these points; they will instead, insist we ought blindly to
be directed by that which they vouchsafe to inform us; that the most
certain road to happiness is to submit in all things to that which they
have thought proper to decide on the nature of things, of which they
avow their own ignorance, when they assert them to be beyond the reach
of mortals. Thus it would appear that when we should consent to accredit
these mysteries, it would never arise of our own knowledge; seeing this
can no otherwise obtain but by the effect of demonstrable evidence;
it would never arise from any intimate conviction of our minds; but it
would be entirely on the word of the theologian himself, that we should
ground our faith; that we should yield our belief. If these things are
to the human species what colours are to the man born blind, they have
at least no existence with relation to ourselves. It will avail the
blind man nothing to tell him these colours have no less existence,
because he cannot see them. But what shall we say of that portrait whose
colours the blind man attempts to explain, whose features he is willing
we should receive upon his authority, whose proportions are to be taken
from his description, merely because we know he cannot behold them?

The Doctor, although unwilling to relinquish his subject, removes none
of the difficulty when he asks, "Are our five senses, by an absolute
necessity in the nature of the thing, all and the only possible ways of
perception? And is it impossible and contradictory there should be any
being in the universe, indued with ways of perception different from
these that are the result of our present composition? Or are these
things, on the contrary, purely arbitrary; and the same power that gave
us these, may have given others to other beings, and might, if he
had pleased have given to us others in this present state?" It seems
perfectly unnecessary to the true point of the argument to reason upon
what can or cannot be done: I therefore reply, that the fact is, we have
but five senses: by the aid of these man is not competent to form any
idea whatever of immateriality; but he is also in as absolute a state of
ignorance, upon what might be his capabilities of conception, if he had
more senses. It is rather acknowledging a weakness in his evidence,
on the part of the Doctor, to be thus obliged to rest it upon the
supposition of what might be the case, if man was a being different to
what he is; in other words, that they would be convincing to mankind
if the human race were not human beings. Therefore to demand what the
Divinity could have done in such a case, is to suppose the thing
in question, seeing we cannot form an idea how far the power of
the Divinity extends: but we may be reasonably allowed to use the
theological argument in elucidation; these men very gravely insist,
upon what authority must be best known to themselves, "that God cannot
communicate to his works that perfection which he himself possesses;"
at the same moment they do not fail to announce his omnipotence. Will
it require any capacity, more than is the common lot of a child, to
comprehend the absurd contradiction of the two assertions? As beings
possessing but five senses, we must then, of necessity, regulate our
judgment by the information they are capable of affording us: we cannot,
by any possibility, have a knowledge of those, which confer the capacity
to comprehend beings, of an order entirely distinguished from that
in which we occupy a place. We are ignorant of the mode in which even
plants vegetate, how then be acquainted with that which has no affinity
with ourselves? A man born blind, has only the use of four senses; he
has not the right, however, of assuming it as a fact, there does not
exist an extra sense for others; but he may very reasonably, and with
great truth aver, that he has no idea of the effects which would be
produced in him, by the sense which he lacks: notwithstanding, if this
blind man was surrounded by other men, whose birth had also left
them devoid or sight, might he not without any very unwarrantable
presumption, be authorized to inquire of them by what right, upon what
authority, they spoke to him of a sense they did not themselves
possess; how they were enabled to reason, to detail the minutiae of that
sensation upon which their own peculiar experience taught them nothing?

In short, we can again reply to Dr. Clarke, and to the theologians, that
following up their own systems, the supposition is impossible, and ought
not to be made, seeing that the Divinity, who according to their own
shewing, made man, was not willing that he should have more than five
senses; in other words, that he should be nothing but what he actually
is; they all found the existence of these immaterial substances upon
the necessity of a power that has the faculty to give a commencement to
motion. But if matter has always existed, of which there does not seem
to exist a doubt, it has always had motion, which is as essential to it
as its extent, and flows from its primitive properties. Indeed the human
mind, with its five senses, is not more competent to comprehend matter
devoid of motion, than it is to understand the peculiar quality of
immateriality: motion therefore exists only in and by matter; mobility
is a consequence of its existence; not that the great whole can occupy
other parts of space than it actually does; the impossibility of
that needs no argument, but all its parts can change their respective
situations--do continually change them; it is from thence results the
preservation, the life of nature, which is always as a whole immutable:
but in supposing, as is done every day, that matter is inert, that is to
say, incapable of producing any thing by itself, without the assistance
of a moving power, which sets it in motion, are we by any means enabled
to conceive that material nature receives this activity from an agent,
who partakes in nothing of material substance? Can man really figure to
himself, even in idea, that that which has no one property of matter,
can create matter, draw it from its own peculiar source, arrange
it, penetrate it, give it play, guide its course? Is it not, on the
contrary, more rational to the mind, more consistent with truth, more
congenial to experience, to suppose that the being who made matter is
himself material: is there the smallest necessity to suppose otherwise?
Can it make man either better or worse, that he should consider the
whole that exists as material? Will it in any manner make him a worse
subject to his sovereign; a worse father to his children; a more unkind
husband; a more faithless friend?

Motion, then, is co-eternal with matter: from all eternity the particles
of the universe have acted and reacted upon each other, by virtue
of their respective energies; of their peculiar essences; of their
primitive elements; of their various combinations. These particles must
have combined in consequence of their affinity; they must have been
either attracted or repelled by their respective relations with each
other; in virtue of these various essences, they must have gravitated
one upon the other; united when they were analagous; separated when that
analogy was dissolved, by the approach of heterogeneous matter; they
must have received their forms, undergone a change of figure, by the
continual collision of bodies. In a material world the acting powers
must be material: in a whole every part of which is essentially in
motion, there is no occasion for a power distinguished from itself;
the whole must be in perpetual motion by its own peculiar energy. The
general motion, as we have elsewhere proved, has its birth from the
individual motion, which beings ever active must uninterruptedly
communicate to each other. Thus every cause produces its effect; this
effect in its turn becomes a cause, which in like manner produces an
effect; this constitutes the eternal chain of things, which although
perpetually changing in its detail, suffers no change in its whole.

Theology, after all, has seldom done more than personify this eternal
series of motion; the principle of mobility inherent to matter: it has
clothed this principle with human qualities, by which it has rendered it
unintelligible: in applying these properties, they have taken no means
of understanding how far they were suitable or not: in their eagerness
to make them assimilate, they have extended them beyond their own
conception; they have heaped them together without any judgment;
and they have been surprised when these qualities, contradictory in
themselves, did not enable them satisfactorily to account for all the
phenomena they beheld; from thence they have wrangled; accused each
other of imbecility; yet infuriated themselves against whoever had the
temerity to question that which they did not themselves understand; in
short, they have acted like a man who should insist that all other men
should have precisely the same vision that he himself had dreamed.

Be this as it may, the greater portion of what either Dr. Clarke or
the theologians tell us, becomes, in some respects, sufficiently
intelligible as soon as applied to nature--to matter: it is eternal,
that is to say, it cannot have had a commencement, it never will have
an end; it is infinite, that is to say, we have no conception of its
limits. Nevertheless, human qualities, which must be always borrowed
from ourselves, and with others we have a very slender acquaintance,
cannot be well suitable to the entire of nature; seeing that these
qualities are in themselves modes of being, or modes which appertain
only to particular beings: not to the great whole which contains them.

Thus, to resume the answers which have been given to Dr. Clarke, we
shall say: _First_, we can conceive that matter has existed from all
eternity, seeing that we cannot conceive it to have been capable of
beginning. _Secondly_, that matter is independent, seeing there is
nothing exterior to itself; that it is immutable, seeing it cannot
change its nature, although it is unceasingly changing its form and its
combinations. _Thirdly_, that matter is self-existent, since not being
able to conceive it can be annihilated, we cannot possibly conceive
it can have commenced to exist. _Fourthly_, that we do not know the
essence, or the true nature of matter, although we have a knowledge of
some of its properties; of some of its qualities: according to the
mode in which they act upon us. _Fifthly_, that matter not having had a
beginning, will never have an end, although its numerous combinations,
its various forms, have necessarily a commencement and a period.
_Sixthly_, that if all that exists, or every thing our mind can conceive
is matter, this matter is infinite; that is to say, cannot be limited by
any thing; that it is omnipresent, seeing there is no place exterior
to itself, indeed, if there was a place exterior to it, that would be a
vacuum. _Seventhly_, that nature is unique, although its elements or
its parts may be varied to infinity, indued with properties extremely
opposite; with qualities essentially different. _Eighthly_, that matter,
arranged, modified, and combined in a certain mode, produces in some
beings what we call intelligence, which is one of its modes of being,
not one of its essential properties, _Ninthly_, that matter is not a
free agent, since it cannot act otherwise than it does, in virtue of the
laws of its nature, or of its existence; that consequently, heavy bodies
must necessarily fall; light bodies by the same necessity rise; fire
must burn; man must experience good and evil, according to the quality
of the beings whose action he experiences. _Tenthly_, that the power
or the energy of matter, has no other bounds than those which are
prescribed by its own existence. _Eleventhly_, that wisdom, justice,
goodness, &c. are qualities peculiar to matter combined and modified,
as it is found in some beings of the human species; that the idea of
perfection is an abstract, negative, metaphysical idea, or mode of
considering objects, which supposes nothing real to be exterior to
itself. _Twelfthly_, that matter is the principle of motion, which it
contains within itself: since matter alone is capable of either giving
or receiving motion: this is what cannot be conceived of immateriality
or simple beings destitute of parts, devoid of extent, without mass,
having no ponderosity, which consequently cannot either move itself or
other bodies.





CHAP. V.

_Examination of the Proofs offered by DESCARTES, MALEBRANCHE, NEWTON,
&c_.


If the evidence of Clarke did not prove satisfactory--if the theologians
of his day disputed the manner in which he handled his subject--if they
were disposed to think he had not established his argument upon
proper foundations, it did not seem probable that either the system of
Descartes, the sublime reveries of Malebranche, or the more methodical
mode adopted by Newton, were at all likely to meet with a better
reception; the same objections will lie against them all, that they have
not demonstrated the existence of their immaterial substances; although
they have incessantly spoken of them, as if they were things of which
they had the most intimate knowledge. Unfortunately this is a rock which
the most sublime geniuses have not been competent to avoid: the most
enlightened men have done little more than stammer upon a subject which
they have all concurred in considering of the highest importance; which
they unceasingly hold forth as the most necessary for man to know;
without at the same time considering he is not in a condition to
occupy himself with objects inaccessible to his senses--which his mind,
consequently, can never grasp--which his utmost research cannot bring
into that tangible shape by which alone he can be enabled to form a
judgment.

To the end that we may be convinced of that want of solidity which the
greatest men have not known how to give to the proofs they have
offered, but which they have successively imagined has established their
positions, let us briefly examine what the most celebrated philosophers,
what the most subtile metaphysicians have said. For this purpose we will
begin with Descartes, the restorer of philosophy among the moderns, to
whose sublime errors we are indebted for the effulgent truths of the
Newtonian system. This great man himself tells us, "All the strength of
argument which I have hitherto used to prove the existence of immaterial
substances, consists in this, that I acknowledge it would not be
possible, my nature was such as it is, that is to say, that I should
have in me the idea of immateriality, if this incorporeity did not truly
exist; this same immateriality, of which the idea is in me, possesses
all those high perfections of which our mind can have some slight idea,
without however being able to comprehend them." In another place he
says, "We must necessarily conclude from this alone, that because I
exist, and have the idea of immateriality, that is to say, of a most
perfect being, the existence is therefore most evidently demonstrated."
There are not, perhaps, many except Descartes himself, to whom this
would appear quite so conclusive; who would be impressed with the
conviction which he seems to imagine is so very substantive.

_First_, We shall reply to Descartes, it is not a warrantable deduction,
that because we have an idea of a thing, we must therefore conclude it
exists; to give validity to such a mode of reasoning would be productive
of the greatest mischief; would, in fact, tend to subvert all human
institutions. Our imagination presents us with the idea of a sphinx, or
of an hippogriff, besides a thousand other fantastical beings; are we,
on that authority, to insist that these things really exist? Is the
mere circumstance of our having an idea of various parts of nature,
discrepantly jumbled together, without any other evidence as to the
assemblage, a sufficient warrantry for calling upon mankind to accredit
the existence of such heterogeneous masses? If a philosopher of the most
consummate experience, of the greatest celebrity, one who enjoyed the
confidence of mankind above every other, was to detail the faculties
and perfections of these visionary beings, although he should hold them
forth as the perfection of all natural combinations, would, I say, any
reasonable being lend himself to the asseveration?

_Secondly_, It is obvious that the mere circumstance of existence,
does not prove the absolute existence of any thing anterior to itself;
although in man, as well as the other beings of nature, it is evidence
that something has existed before him. If this argument was to be
admitted, are they aware how far it, would carry them? To maintain
that the existence of one being demonstrably proves the existence of
an anterior being, would be, in fact, denying that any thing was
self-existent. The fallacy of such a position is too glaring to need
refutation.

_Thirdly_, It is not possible he should have a distinct, positive idea
of immateriality, of which be, as well as the theologian, labours to
prove the existence. It is impossible for man, for a material being, to
form to himself a correct idea, or indeed any idea, of incorporeity; of
a substance without extent, acting upon nature, which is corporeal;
a truth which it may not be presuming too much to say we have already
sufficiently proved.

_Fourthly_, It is equally impossible for man to have any clear, decided
idea of perfection, of infinity, of immensity, and other theological
attributes. To Descartes we must therefore reply as we have done to Dr.
Clarke on his twelfth proposition.

Thus nothing can well be less conclusive than the proofs upon which
Descartes rests the existence of immateriality. He gives it thought
and intelligence, but how conceive these qualities without a subject to
which they may adhere? He pretends that we cannot conceive it but "as a
power which applies itself successively to the parts of the universe."
Again, he says, "that an immaterial substance cannot be said to have
extent, but as we say of fire contained in a piece of iron, which has not,
properly speaking, any other extension than that of the iron itself."
According to these notions we shall be justified in taxing him with
having announced in a very clear, in a most unequivocal manner,
that this is nature herself: this indeed is a pure Spinosism; it was
decidedly on the principles of Descartes that Spinosa drew up his
system; in fact it flows out of it consecutively.

We might, therefore, with great reason, accuse Descartes of atheism,
seeing that he very effectually destroys the feeble proofs he adduces
in support of his own hypothesis; we have solid foundation for insisting
that his system overturns the idea of the creation, because if from
the modification we subtract the subject, the modification itself
disappears: and if, according to the Cartesians, this immateriality is
nothing without nature, they are complete Spinosians, with another name.
If incorporeity is the motive-power of this nature, it no longer exists
independently; it, in fact, exists no longer than the subject to which
it is inherent subsists. Thus no longer existing independently, it will
exist only while the nature which it moves shall endure; without
matter, without a subject to move, to preserve, what is to become of it,
according to this doctrine, or rather according to this elucidation of a
system which is in itself untenable?

It will be obvious from this, that Descartes, far from establishing on
a rocky foundation the existence of this immateriality, totally destroys
his own system. The same thing will necessarily happen to all those who
reason upon his principles; they will always finish by confuting him,
and by contradicting themselves. The same want of just inference, the
same discrepancy, will obtrude themselves in the principles of the
celebrated Father Malebranche; which, if considered with the slightest
attention, appear to conduct directly to Spinosism; in fact, can any
thing be more in unison with the language of Spinosa himself, than to
say, as does Malebranche, "that the universe is only an emanation from
God; that we see every thing in God, that every thing we see is only
God; that God alone does every thing that is done; that all the action,
with every operation that takes place in nature, is God himself; in a
word, that God is every being and the only being." Is not this formally
asserting that nature herself is God? Moreover, at the same time
Malebranche assures us we see every thing in God, he pretends that it is
not yet clearly demonstrated that matter and bodies have existence; that
faith alone teaches us these mysteries, of which, without it, we should
not have any knowledge whatever. In reply, it might be a very fair
question, how the existence of the being who created matter can be
demonstrated, if the existence of this matter itself be yet a problem?
He himself acknowledges "that we can have no distinct demonstration of
the existence of any other being than of that which is necessary;" he
further adds, "that if it be closely examined, it will be seen, that it
is not even possible to know with certitude, if God be or be not truly
the creator of a material, of a sensible world." According to these
notions, it is evident, that, following up the system of Malebranche,
man has only his faith to guarantee the existence of the world; yet
faith itself supposes its existence; if it be not, however, certain that
it does exist, and the Bishop of Cloyne, Dr. Berkeley, has also held
this in doubt, how shall we be persuaded that we must believe the
oracles which have been delivered to a visionary world?

On the other hand, these notions of Malebranche completely overturns all
the theological doctrines of free agency. How can the liberty of man's
action be reconciled with the idea that it is the Divinity who is the
immediate mover of nature; who actually gives impulse to matter and
bodies, without whose immediate interference nothing takes place; who
pre-determines his creatures to every thing they do? How can it be
pretended, if this doctrine is to be accredited, that human souls have
the faculty of forming thoughts--have the power of volition--are in
a condition to move themselves--have the capacity to modify their
existence? If it be supposed with the theologians, that the conservation
of the creatures in the universe is a continued creation, must it not
appear, that being thus perpetually recreated, they are enabled to
commit evil? It will then be a self-evident fact, that, admitting the
system of Malebranche, God does every thing, and that his creatures
are no more than passive instruments in his hands. Under this idea they
could not be answerable for their sins, because they would have no means
of avoiding them. Under this notion they could neither have merit or
demerit; they would be like a sharp instrument in their own hands, which
whether it was applied to a good or to an evil purpose, it would
attach to themselves, not to the instrument: this would annihilate
all religion: it is thus that theology is continually occupied with
committing suicide.

Let us now see, if the immortal Newton, the great luminary of science,
the champion of astronomical truth, will afford us clearer notions, more
distinct ideas, more certain evidence of the existence of immaterial
substances. This great man, whose comprehensive genius unravelled
nature, whose capacious mind developed her laws, seems to have
bewildered himself, the instant he lost sight of them. A slave to the
prejudices of his infancy, he had not the courage to hold the lamp
of his own enlightened understanding to the agent theology has so
gratuitously associated with nature; he has not been able to allow
that her own peculiar powers were adequate to the production of that
beautiful phenomena, he has with such masterly talents so luminously
explained. In short, the sublime Newton himself becomes an infant when
he quits physics, when he lays aside demonstration, to lose himself in
the devious sinuosities, in the inextricable labyrinths, in the delusive
regions of theology. This is the manner in which he speaks of the
Divinity:

"This God," says he, "governs all, not as the soul of the world, but
as the lord and sovereign of all things. It is in consequence of
his sovereignty that he is called the Lord God, [Greek letters],
_pantokrator_, the universal emperor. Indeed the word God is relative
and relates itself with slaves; the Deity is the dominion or the
sovereignty of God, not over his own body, as those think who look upon
God as the soul of the world, but over slaves."

From this it will be seen that Newton, as well as the theologians, makes
the Divinity a pure spirit, who presides over the universe as a monarch,
as a lord paramount; that is to say, what man defines in earthly
governors, despot, absolute princes, powerful monarchs, whose
governments have no model but their own will, who exercise an unlimited
power over their subjects, transformed into slaves; whom they usually
compel to feel in a very grievous manner the weight of their authority.
But according to the ideas of Newton, the world has not existed from
eternity, the staves of God have been formed in the course of time; from
this it would be a just inference, that before the creation of the world
the god of Newton was a sovereign without subjects. Let us see if this
truly great philosopher is more in unison with himself in the subsequent
ideas which he delivers on this subject.

"The supreme God," he says, "is an eternal, infinite, and absolutely
perfect being; but however perfect a being may be, if he has no
sovereignty he is not the supreme God. The word God signifies Lord,
but every lord is not god; it is the sovereignty of the spiritual Being
which constitutes God; it is the true sovereignty which constitutes the
true God; it is the supreme sovereignty which constitutes the supreme
God; it is a false sovereignty which constitutes a false god. From true
sovereignty, it follows, that the true God is living, intelligent,
and powerful; and from his other perfections, it follows, that he is
supremely or sovereignly perfect. He is eternal, infinite, omniscient;
that is to say, he exists from eternity, and will never have an end; he
governs all, and he knows every thing that is done, or that can be done.
He is neither eternity nor infinity, but he is eternal and infinite; he
is not space or duration, but he exists and is present." The term here
used is _adest_, which appears to have been placed there to avoid saying
that God is contained in space.

In all this unintelligible series, nothing is to be found but incredible
efforts to reconcile the theological attributes, the abstract with the
human qualities, which have been ascribed to the Divinity; we see in
it negative qualities, which can no longer be suitable to man, given,
however, to the Sovereign of nature, whom he has supposed a king.
However it may be, this picture always supposes the Supreme God to have
occasion for subjects to establish his sovereignty. It makes God stand
in need of man for the exercise of his empire; without these, according
to the text, he would not be a king; he could have had no empire when
there was nothing: but if this description of Newton was just, if it
really represented the Divinity, we might be very fairly permitted to
ask, Does not this Spiritual King exercise his spiritual empire in vain,
upon refractory beings, who do not at all times do that which he is
willing they should; who are continually struggling against his power;
who spread disorder in his states? This Spiritual Monarch, who is master
of the minds, of the souls, of the wills, of the passions of his slaves,
does he leave them the freedom of revolting against him? This infinite
Monarch, who fills every thing with his immensity, who governs all, does
he also govern the man who sins; does he direct his actions; is he
in him when he offends his God? The devil, the false god, the evil
principle, hath he not, according to this, a more extensive empire than
the true God, whose projects, if we are to believe the theologians, he
is unceasingly overturning? In earthly governments the true sovereign
is generally considered to be him whose power in a state influences the
greater number of his subjects. If, then, we could suppose him to be
omnipresent, that is, present in all places, should we not say he was
the sad witness to all the outrages committed against his authority,
and we should not entertain a very exalted opinion of his power if he
permitted them to continue. This, it is true, would be arguing upon a
monarch of this world, still it would be the language held by observers.

Is the spirituality of the Divinity well supported by those who say he
fills all space, who from that instant give him extent, ascribe to him
volume, make him correspond with the various points of space? This is
the very reverse of an immaterial substance.

"God is one," continues Newton, "and he is the same for ever, and every
where, not only by his virtue alone, or by his energy, but also by his
substance." But how are we to conceive that a being who is in continual
activity, who produces all the changes which beings undergo, can always
be himself the same? What is to be understood by either this virtue or
this energy? These are relative terms, which do not present any clear,
distinct idea to our mind, except as they apply to man: what are we,
however, to understand by the divine substance? If this substance be
spiritual, that is, devoid of extent, how can there exist in it any
parts? How can it give impulse to matter, how set it in motion? How can
it even be conceived by mortals?

Nevertheless Newton informs us, "that all things are contained in him,
and are moved in him, but without reciprocity of action: God experiences
nothing by the motion of bodies; these experience no resistance whatever
by his omnipresence." It would here appear that he clothes the Divinity
with that which bears the character of vacuum--of nothing; without
that, it would be almost impossible not to have a reciprocal action
or relation between these substances, which are either penetrated or
encompassed on all sides. It must be obvious, that in this instance our
scientific author does not distinctly understand himself.

He proceeds, "It is an incontestible truth, that God exists necessarily,
and the same necessity obliges to exist always and every where: from
whence it follows, that he is in every thing similar to itself; he is
all eyes, all ears, all brains, all arms, all feeling, all intelligence,
all action; but in a mode by no means human, by no means corporeal, and
which is totally unknown to us. In the same manner as a blind man has
no idea of colours, it is that we have no idea of the mode in which
God feels and understands." The necessary existence of the Divinity
is precisely the thing in question; it is this existence that it was
needful to have verified by proofs as clear, by evidence as distinct, by
demonstration as strong, as gravitation and attraction. One would have
hardly thought it possible the expansive capabilities of Newton
would not have compassed it. But oh, unrivalled genius! so mighty,
so powerful, so colossal, while yet you was a geometrician; so
insignificant, so weak, so inconsistent; when you became a theologian;
that is to say, when you reasoned upon that which can neither be
calculated, nor submitted to experience; how could you think of speaking
to us on a subject which, by your own confession is to you just what a
picture is to a man born blind? Wherefore quit nature, which had already
explained to you so much? Why seek in imaginary spaces those causes,
those powers, that energy, which she would have distinctly pointed
out to you, had you been willing to have consulted her with your usual
sagacity? The gigantic, the intelligent Newton, suffers himself to be
hoodwinked--to be blinded by prejudice; he has not courage to look a
question fairly in the face, when that question involves notions which
habit has rendered sacred to him; he turns his eyes from truth, he casts
behind him his experience, he lulls to sleep his reason, when it becomes
necessary to probe opinions full of contradictions, yet fraught with the
best interests of humanity.

Let us, however, continue to examine how far the most transcendent
genius is capable of leading himself astray, when once he abandons
experience, when once he chains up his reason, when once he suffers
himself to be guided by his imagination.

"God," continues the father of modern philosophy, "is totally destitute
of body and of corporeal figure; here is the reason why he cannot be
either seen, touched, or understood; and ought not to be adored under
any corporeal form." What idea, however, can be formed of a being who
is resembled by nothing of which we have any knowledge? What are the
relations that can be supposed to exist between such very dissimilar
beings? When man renders this being his adoration, does he not, in fact,
in despite of himself, make him a being similar to his own species; does
he not suppose that, like himself, he is sensible to homage--to be won
by presents--gained by flattery; in short, he is treated like a king
of the earth, who exacts the respect, demands the fealty, requires the
obedience of all who are submitted to him. Newton adds, "we have ideas
of his attributes, but we do not know that it is any one substance; we
only see the figures and the colours of bodies; we only hear sounds; we
only touch the exterior surfaces; we only scent odours; we only taste
flavours: no one of our senses, no one of our reflections, can shew us
the intimate nature of substances: we have still less ideas of God."

If we have an idea of the attributes of God, it is only because we
clothe him with those which belong to ourselves; which we never do more
than aggrandize, which we only augment or exaggerate; we then mistake
them for those qualities with which we were at first acquainted. If in
all those substances which are pervious to our senses, we only know them
by the effects they produce on us, after which we assign them qualities,
at least these qualities are something tangible, they give birth to
clear and distinct ideas. This superficial knowledge, however slender
it may be, with which our senses furnish us, is the only one we can
possibly have; constituted as we are, we find ourselves under the
necessity of resting contented with it, and we discover that it is
sufficient for our wants; but we have not even the most superficial idea
of immateriality, or a substance distinguished from all those with which
we have the slightest acquaintance. Nevertheless, we hear men hourly
reasoning upon it, disputing about its properties, advancing its
faculties, as if they had the most demonstrable evidence of the fact;
tearing each other in pieces, because the one does not readily admit
what the other asserts, upon a subject which no man is competent to
understand.

Our author goes on "We only have a knowledge of God by his attributes,
by his properties, by the excellent and wise arrangement which he
has given to all things, and by their FINAL CAUSES: we admire him
in consequence of his perfections." I repeat, that we have no real
knowledge of the Divinity; that we borrow his attributes from ourselves;
but it is evident these cannot be suitable to the Universal Being, who
neither can have the same nature nor the same properties as particular
beings; it is nevertheless after ourselves that we assign him
intelligence, wisdom, perfection, in subtracting from them what we call
defects. As to the order, or the arrangement of the universe, man finds
it excellent, esteems it the perfection of wisdom, as long as it is
favorable to his species; or when the causes which are co-existent with
himself do not disturb his own peculiar existence; otherwise he is apt
to complain of confusion, and final causes vanish: he then attributes to
an immutable God, motives equally borrowed from his own peculiar mode
of action, for deranging the beautiful order he so much admires in the
universe. Thus it is always in himself, that is, in his own individual
mode of feeling, that he draws up the ideas of the order, the wisdom,
the excellence, the perfection which he ascribes to the Deity; whilst
the good as well as the evil which take place in the world, are
the necessary consequence of the essence of things; of the general,
immutable laws of nature; in short, of the gravitation, of the repulsion
of matter; of those unchangeable laws of motion, which Newton himself
has so ably thrown into light; but which he has by a strange fatuity
forborne to apply when the question was concerning the cause of these
phenomena, which prejudice has refused to the capabilities of nature. He
goes on, "We revere, and we adore God, on account of his sovereignty:
we worship him like his slaves; a God destitute of sovereignty, of
providence, and of final causes, would be no more than nature and
destiny." It is true that superstition enjoins man to adore its gods
like ignorant slaves, who tremble under a master whom they know not; he
certainly prays to them on all occasions, sometimes requesting nothing
less than an entire change in the essence of things, to gratify
his capricious desires, and it is perhaps well for him they are not
competent to grant his request: in the origin, as we have shewn, these
gods were nothing more than nature acting by necessary laws, clothed
under a variety of fables; or necessity personified under a multitude of
names. However this may be, we do not believe that true religion,
that sterling worship which renders man grateful, whilst it exalts the
majesty of the Divinity, requires any such meanness from man that
he should act like a slave; he is rather expected to sit down to the
banquet prepared for him, with all the dignity of an invited guest;
under the cheering consciousness of a welcome that is never accorded
to slaves; nothing is required at his hands, but that he should conduct
himself temperately in the banquetting-house; that he should be grateful
for the good cheer he receives; that he should have virtue; (which we
have already sufficiently explained is to render himself useful, by
making others happy); that he should not by pertinaciously setting up
whimsical opinions, and insisting on their adoption by his neighbour,
disturb the harmony of the feast; that he should be sufficiently
intelligent to know when he is really felicitous, and not seek to put
down the gaiety of his fellow guests; but that he should rise from
the board satisfied with himself, contented with others; in short, to
comprise the whole in a trite axiom of one of the Greek philosophers, he
should learn the invaluable secret, "to _bear_ and _forbear_."

But to proceed. Newton tells us, "that from a physical and blind
necessity, which should preside every where, and be always the same,
there could not emanate any variety in the beings; the diversity which
we behold, could only have its origin in the ideas and in the will of a
being which exists necessarily;" but wherefore should not this diversity
spring out of natural causes, from matter acting upon matter; the action
of which either attracts and combines various yet analogous elements, or
else separates beings by the intervention of those substances which have
not a disposition to unite? Is not bread the result of the combination
of flour, yeast and water? As for the blind necessity, as it is
elsewhere said, we must acknowledge it is that of which we are ignorant,
either of its properties or its energies; of which being blind ourselves
we have no knowledge of its mode of action. Philosophers explain all the
phenomena that occur by the properties of matter; and though they feel
the want of a more intimate acquaintance with natural causes, they do
not therefore the less believe them deducible from these properties or
these causes. Are, therefore, the philosophers atheists, because they
do not reply, it is God who is the author of these effects? Is the
industrious workman, who makes gunpowder, to be challenged as an
atheist, because he says the terrible effects of this destructive
material, which inspired the native Americans with such awe, which
raised in their winds such wonder, are to be ascribed to the junction of
the apparently harmless substances of nitre, charcoal and sulpher, set
in activity by the accession of trivial scintillations, produced from
the collision of steel with flint, merely because some bigoted _Priest
of the Sun_, who is ignorant of the composition, chooses to think it is
not possible such a striking phenomenon could be the work of any thing
short of the secret agents, whom he has himself appointed to govern the
world?

"It is allegorically said that God sees, hears, speaks, smiles, loves,
hates, desires, gives, receives, rejoices, grows angry, fights, makes,
or fashions, &c. because all that is said of God, is borrowed from the
conduct of man, by an imperfect analogy." Man has not been able to act
otherwise, for want of being acquainted with nature and her eternal
course: whenever he has imagined a peculiar energy which he has not been
able to fathom, he has given it the name of God; and he has then made
him act upon the self-same principles, as he himself would adopt,
according to which he would act if he was the master. It is from this
proneness to _Theanthropy_, that has flowed all those absurd, and
frequently dangerous ideas, upon which are founded the superstitions of
the world; who all adore in their gods either natural causes of which
they are ignorant, or else powerful mortals of whose malice they stand
in awe. The sequel will shew the fatal effects that have resulted
to mankind from the absurd ideas they have very frequently formed to
themselves of the Divinity; that nothing could be more degrading to
him, more injurious to themselves, than the idea of comparing him to
an absolute sovereign, to a despot, to a tyrant. For the present let
us continue to examine the proofs offered in support of their various
systems.

It is unceasingly repeated that the regular action, the invariable
order, which reigns in the universe, the benefits heaped upon mortals,
announce a wisdom, an intelligence, a goodness, which we cannot refuse
to acknowledge, in the cause which produces these marvellous effects. To
this we must reply, that it is unquestionably true that not only these
things, but all the phenomena he beholds, indicate the existence of
something gifted very superiorly to erring man; the great question,
however, is one that perhaps will never be solved, what is this being?
Is this question answered by heaping together the estimable qualities
of man? Speaking with relation to ourselves, which is all that the
theologian really does, although in such numerous regions he pretends
to do a great deal more, we can apply the terms goodness, wisdom,
intelligence, the best with which we are acquainted, to this being for
the want of having those that may be appropriate; but I maintain, this
does not, in point of fact, afford us one single idea of the _Great
Cause of causes_; we admire his works; and knowing that what we approve
highly in our own species, we attribute to their being wise, we say the
Divinity displays wisdom. So far it is well; but this, after all, is a
human quality. If we consult experience, we shall presently be convinced
that our wisdom does not bear the least affinity to the actions
attributed to the Divinity. To get at this a little closer, we must
endeavour to find out what we do not call wisdom in man; this will help
us to form an estimate, how very incompetent we are to describe the
qualities of a being that differs so very materially from ourselves.
We most certainly should not call him a wise man, who having built a
beautiful residence, should himself set it on fire; and thus destroy
what he had laboured so much to bring to perfection: yet this happens
every day in nature, without its being in any manner a warrantry for
us to charge her with folly. If therefore we were to form our judgments
after our own puny ideas of wisdom, what should we say? Why, in point
of fact, just what the man does, who, thinking he has had too much rain,
implores fine weather? Which, properly translated, is neither more nor
less than giving the Divinity to understand he best knows what is proper
for himself. The just, the only fair inference to be drawn from this,
is, that we positively know nothing about the matter; that those who
pretend they do, would, if it was upon any other subject, he suspected
of having an unsound mind. We do not mean to insist that we are in the
right, but we mean to aver that the object of this work is not so much
either to build up new systems, or to put down old ones, as by shewing
man the inconclusiveness of his reasonings upon matters not accessible
to his comprehension--to induce him to be more tolerant to his
neighbour--to invite him to be less rancorous against those who do not
see with his eyes--to hold forth to him motives for forbearance, against
those whose system of faith may not exactly harmonize with his own--to
render him less ferocious in support of opinions, which, if he will
but discard his prejudices, he may find not so solidly bottomed as he
imagines. All we know is scarcely more than that the motion we witness
in the universe is the necessary consequence of the laws of matter; that
the uniformity of this motion is evidence of their immutability; that it
is not too much to say it cannot cease to act in the manner it does, as
long as the same causes operate, governed by the same circumstances.
We evidently see that motion, however regular in our mind, that order,
however beautiful to our admiring optics, yields to what we term
disorder, to that which we designate frightful confusion, as soon as new
causes, not analogous to the preceding, either disturb or suspend
their action. We further know that a better knowledge of nature,
the consequence of time, the result of patient, laborious, physical
researches, with the comparison of facts and the application of
experience, has enabled man in many instances to divert from himself the
evil effects of inevitable causes, which anterior to these discoveries
overwhelmed his unhappy progenitors with ruin. How far these salutary
developements are to be carried by industry, what may be achieved by
honesty, what light is to be gathered from the recession of prejudice,
the wisest among men is not competent to decide. Certain it is, that
phenomena which for ages were supposed to denounce the anger of the
Deity against mankind, are now well understood to be common effects of
natural causes.

Order, as we have elsewhere shewn, is only the effects which result
to ourselves from a series of motion; there cannot be any disorder
relatively to the great whole; in which all that takes place is
necessary; in which every thing is determined by laws which nothing can
change. The order of nature may be damaged or destroyed relatively to
ourselves, but it is never contradicted relatively to herself, since she
cannot act otherwise than she does: if we attribute to her the evils we
sustain, we are equally obliged to acknowledge we owe to her the good we
experience.

It in said, that animals furnish a convincing proof of the powerful
cause of their existence; that the admirable harmony of their parts, the
mutual assistance they lend each other, the regularity with which
they fulfill their functions, the preservation of these parts, the
conservation of such complicated wholes, announce a workman who unites
wisdom with power; in short, whole tracts of anatomy and botany have
been copied to prove nothing more than that these things exist, for of
the power that produced them there cannot remain a doubt. We shall never
learn more from these erudite tracts, save that there exists in nature
certain elements with an aptitude to attraction; a disposition to unite,
suitable to form wholes, to induce combinations capable of producing
very striking effects. To be surprised that the brain, the heart, the
arteries, the veins, the eyes, the ears of an animal, act as we see
them--that the roots of plants attract juices, or that trees produce
fruit, is to be surprised that a tree, a plant, or an animal exists at
all. These beings would not exist, or would no longer be that which we
know they are, if they ceased to act as they do: this is what happens
when they die. If the formation, the combination, the modes of action,
variously possessed by these beings, if their conservation for a season,
followed by their destruction or dissolution, prove any thing, it is the
immutability of those laws which operate in nature: we cannot doubt
the power of nature; she produces all the animals we behold, by the
combination, of matter, continually in motion; the harmony that subsists
between the component parts of these beings, is a consequence of the
necessary laws of their nature, and of that which results from their
combination. As soon as this accord ceases, the animal is necessarily
destroyed: from this we must conclude that every mutation in nature
is necessary; is only a consequence of its laws; that it could not be
otherwise than it is, under the circumstances in which it is placed.

Man, who looks upon himself as the _chef d'oeuvre_, furnishes more than
any other production a proof of the immutability of the laws of nature:
in this sensible, intelligent, thinking being, whose vanity leads him
to believe himself the sole object of the divine predilection, who forms
his God after his own peculiar model, we see only a more inconstant,
a more brittle machine; one more subject to be deranged by its
extreme complication, than the grosser beings: beasts destitute of our
knowledge, plants that vegetate, stones devoid of feeling, are in many
respects beings more highly favored than man: they are at least exempted
from the sorrows of the mind--from the torments of reflection--from that
devouring, chagrin to which he is so frequently a prey. Who is he who
would not be a plant or a stone, every time reminiscence forces upon his
imagination the irreparable loss of a beloved object? Would it not
be better to be an inanimate mass, than a restless, turbulent,
superstitious being, who does nothing but tremble under the imaginary
displeasure of beings of his own creation; who to support his own gloomy
opinions, immolates his fellow creatures at the shrine of his idol; who
ravages the country, and deluges the earth with the blood of those who
happen to differ from him on a speculative point of an unintelligible
creed? Beings destitute of life, bereft of feeling, without memory, not
having the faculties of thought, at least are not afflicted by the idea
of either the past, the present, or the future; they do not at any rate
believe themselves in danger of becoming eternally unhappy, because they
way have reasoned badly; or because they happened to be born in a land
where truth has never yet shed its refulgent beams on the darkened mind
of perplexed mortals.

Let it not then be said that we cannot have an idea of a work, without
also having an idea of the workman, as distinguished from his work: the
savage, when he first beheld the terrible operation of gunpowder,
did not form the most distant idea that it was the work of a man like
himself. Nature is not to be contemplated as a work of this kind; she is
self-existent. In her bosom every thing is produced: she is an immense
elaboratory, provided with materials, who makes the instruments of which
she avails herself in her operations. All her works are the effects of
her own energies; of those agents which she herself produces; of those
immutable laws by which she sets every thing in activity. Eternal,
indestructible elements, ever in motion, combine themselves variously,
and thus give birth to all beings, to all the phenomena which fill the
weak eyes of erring mortals with wonder and dismay; to all the effects,
whether good or bad, of which man experiences the influence; to all the
vicissitudes he undergoes, from the moment of his birth until that of
his death; to order and to confusion, which he never discriminates but
by the various modes in which he is affected: in short, to all those
miraculous spectacles with which he occupies his meditation--upon which
he exercises his reason--which frequently spread consternation over the
surface of the earth. These elements need nothing when circumstances
favour their junction, save their own peculiar properties, whether
individual or united, with the motion that is essential to them, to
produce all those phenomena which powerfully striking the senses of
mankind, either fill him with admiration, or stagger him with alarm.

But supposing for a moment that it was impossible to conceive the work,
without also conceiving the workman, who watches over his work, where
must we place this workman? Shall it be interior or exterior to his
production? Is he matter and motion, or is he only space or the vacuum?
In all these cases either he would be nothing, or he would be contained
in nature: as nature contains only matter and motion, it must be
concluded that the agent who moves it is material; that he is corporeal;
if this agent be exterior to nature, then we can no longer form any
idea of the place which he occupieth: neither can we better conceive an
immaterial being; nor the mode in which a spirit without extent can
act upon matter from which it is separated. These unknown spaces, which
imagination has placed beyond the visible world, can have no existence
for a being, who with difficulty sees down to his feet; he cannot paint
to his mind any image of the power which inhabit them; but if he is
compelled to form some kind of a picture, he must combine at random the
fantastical colours which he is ever obliged to draw from the world he
inhabits: in this case he will really do no more than reproduce in idea,
part or parcels of that which he has actually seen; he will form a whole
which perhaps has no existence in nature, but which it will be in vain
he strives to distinguish from her; to place out of her bosom. When he
shall be ingenuous with himself, When he shall be no longer willing to
delude others, he will be obliged to acknowledge, that the portrait he
has painted, although in its combination it resembles nothing in the
universe, is nevertheless in all its constituent members an exact
delineation of that which nature presents to our view. Hobbes in his
_Leviathan_ says, "The universe, the whole mass of things, is corporeal,
that is to say, body; and hath the dimensions of magnitude, namely,
length, breadth, and depth: also every part of body is likewise body,
and hath the like dimensions; and consequently every part of the
universe is body; and that which is not body, is no part of the
universe; and because the universe is all, that which is no part of it
is nothing; and consequently no where: nor does it follow from hence,
that spirits are nothing, for they have dimensions, and are therefore
really bodies; though that name in common speech be given to such bodies
only as are visible, or palpable, that is, that have some degree of
opacity: but for spirits they call them incorporeal; which is a name
of more honour, and may therefore with more piety be attributed to God
himself, in whom we consider not what attribute expresseth best his
nature, which is incomprehensible; but what best expresseth our desire
to honour him."

It will be insisted that if a statue or a watch were shewn to a savage,
who had never before seen either, he would not be able to prevent
himself from acknowledging that these things were the works of some
intelligent agent of greater ability, possessing more industry than
himself: it will be concluded from thence, that we are in like manner
obliged to acknowledge that the universe, that man, that the various
phenomena, are the works of an agent, whose intelligence is more
comprehensive, whose power far surpasses our own. Granted: who has ever
doubted it? the proposition is self-evident; it cannot admit of even a
cavil. Nevertheless we reply, in the _first place_, that it is not to
be doubted that nature is extremely powerful; diligently industrious:
we admire her activity every time we are surprised by the extent, every
time we contemplate the variety, every time we behold those complicated
effects which are displayed in her works; or whenever we take the pains
to meditate upon them: nevertheless, she is not really more industrious
in one of her works than she is in another; she is not fathomed with
more ease in those we call her most contemptible productions, than she
is in her most sublime efforts: we no more understand how she has been
capable of producing a stone or a metal, than the means by which she
organized a head like that of the illustrious Newton. We call that
man industrious who can accomplish things which we cannot; nature is
competent to every thing: as soon therefore as a thing exists, it is a
proof she has been capable of producing it: but it is never more than
relatively to ourselves that we judge beings to be industrious: we
then compare them to ourselves; and as we enjoy a quality which we call
intelligence, by the assistance of which we accomplish things, by which
we display our diligence, we naturally conclude from it, that those
works which most astonish us, do not belong to her, but are to be
ascribed to an intelligent being like ourselves, but in whom we make the
intelligence commensurate with the astonishment these phenomena excite
in us; that is to say, in other words, to our own peculiar ignorance,
and the weakness incident to our nature.

In the _second place_, we must observe, that the savage, to whom either
the statue or the watch is brought, will or will not have ideas of human
industry: if he has ideas of it, he will feel that this watch or
this statue, way be the work of a being of his own species, enjoying
faculties of which he is himself deficient: if he has no idea of it, if
he has no comprehension of the resources of human art, when he beholds
the spontaneous motion of the watch, he will be impressed with the
belief that it is an animal, which cannot be the work of man. Multiplied
experience confirms this mode of thinking which is ascribed to the
savage. The Peruvians mistook the Spaniards for gods, because they made
use of gunpowder, rode on horseback, and came in vessels which sailed
quite alone. The inhabitants of the island of Tenian being ignorant
of fire before the arrival of Europeans, the first time they saw it,
conceived it to be an animal who devoured the wood. Thus it is, that the
savage, in the same manner as many great and learned men, who believe
themselves much more acute, will attribute the strange effects that
strike his organs, to a genius or to a spirit; that is to say, to an
unknown power; to whom he will ascribe capabilities of which he believes
the beings of his own species are entirely destitute: by this he will
prove nothing, except that he is himself ignorant of what man is capable
of producing. It is thus that a raw unpolished people raise their eyes
to heaven, every time they witness some unusual phenomenon. It is thus
that the people denominate all those strange effects, with the natural
causes of which they are ignorant, miraculous, supernatural, divine; but
these are not by reasonable persons therefore considered proofs of what
they assert: as the multitude are generally unacquainted with the cause
of any thing, every object becomes a miracle in their eyes; at least
they imagine God is the immediate cause of the good they enjoy--of the
evil they suffer. In short, it is thus that the theologians themselves
solve every difficulty that starts in their road; they ascribe to God
all those phenomena, of the causes of which either they are themselves
ignorant, or else unwilling that man should be acquainted with the
source.

In the _third place_, the savage, in opening the watch, and examining
its parts, will perhaps feel, that this machinery announces a work which
can only be the result of human labour. He will perhaps perceive, that
they very obviously differ from the immediate productions of nature,
whom he has not observed to produce wheels made of polished metal. He
will further notice, perhaps, that these parts when separated, no longer
act as they did when they were combined; that the motion he so much
admired, ceases when their union is broken. After these observations, he
will attribute the watch to the ingenuity of man; that is to say, to
a being like himself, of whom he has some ideas, but whom he
judges capable to construct machines to which he is himself utterly
incompetent. In short, he will ascribe the honour of his watch to a
being known to him in some respects, provided with faculties very far
superior to his own; but he will be at an immense distance from the
belief, that this material work, whose ingenuity pleases him so much,
can be the effect of an immaterial cause; or of an agent destitute of
organs, without extent; whose action upon material beings cannot be
within, the sphere of his comprehension. Nevertheless, man, when he
cannot embrace the causes of things, does not scruple to insist that
they are impossible to be the production of nature, although he is
entirely ignorant how far the powers of this nature extend; to what
her capabilities are equal. In viewing the world, we must acknowledge
material causes for many of those phenomena which take place in it;
those who study nature are continually adding fresh discoveries to
this list of physical causes; science, as she enriches the intellectual
stores of human enjoyment, every day throws a broader light on the
energies of nature, which _prejudice_, aided by its almost inseparable
companion, _ignorance_, would for ever bind down in the fetters of
impotence.

Let us not, however, be told, that pursuing this hypothesis, we
attribute every thing to a blind cause--to the fortuitous concurrence
of atoms--to chance. Those only are called blind causes of which we know
not either the combination, the laws, or the power. Those effects are
called fortuitous, with whose causes man is unacquainted; to which his
experience affords him no clue; which his ignorance prevents him from
foreseeing. All those effects, of which he does not see the necessary
connection with their causes, he attributes to chance. Nature is not a
blind cause; she never acts by chance; nothing that she does would
ever be considered fortuitous, by him who should understand her mode of
action--who had a knowledge of her resources--who was intelligent in her
ways. Every thing that she produces is strictly necessary--is never more
than a consequence of her eternal, immutable laws; all is connected in
her by invisible bonds; every effect we witness flows necessarily from
its cause, whether we are in a condition to fathom it, or whether we are
obliged to let it remain hidden from our view. It is very possible there
should be ignorance on our part; but the words spirit, intelligence,
will not remedy this ignorance; they will rather redouble it, by
arresting our research; by preventing us from conquering those
impediments which obstruct us in probing the natural causes of the
effects, with which our visual faculties bring us acquainted.

This may serve for an answer to the clamour of those who raise perpetual
objections to the partizans of nature, by unceasingly accusing them with
attributing every thing to chance. Chance is a word devoid of sense,
which furnishes no substantive idea; at least it indicates only the
ignorance of its employers. Nevertheless, we are triumphantly told, it
is reiterated continually, that a regular work cannot be ascribed to the
concurrence of chance. Never, we are informed, will it be possible to
arrive at the formation of a poem such as the Iliad, by means of letters
thrown together promiscuously or combined at random. We agree to it
without hesitation; but, ingenuously, are the letters which compose a
poem thrown with the hand in the manner of dice? It would avail as much
to say, we could not pronounce a discourse with the feet. It is nature,
who combines according to necessary laws, under given circumstances, a
head organized in a mode suitable to bring forth a poem: it is nature
who assembles the elements, which furnish man with a brain competent to
give birth to such a work: it is nature, who, through the medium of the
imagination, by means of the passions, in consequence of the temperament
which she bestows upon man, capacitates him to produce such a
masterpiece of fancy; such a never-fading effort of the mind: it is his
brain modified in a certain manner, crowded with ideas, decorated with
images, made fruitful by circumstances, that alone can become the matrix
in which a poem can be conceived--in which the matter of it can be
digested: this is the only womb whose activity could usher to an
admiring world, the sublime stanzas which develope the story of the
unfortunate Priam, and immortalize their author. A head organized like
that of Homer, furnished with the same vigour, glowing with the same
vivid imagination, enriched with the same erudition, placed under the
same circumstances, would necessarily, and not by chance, produce the
poem of the Iliad; at least, unless it be denied that causes similar in
every thing must produce effects perfectly identical. We should without
doubt be surprised, if there were in a dice-box a hundred thousand dice,
to see a hundred thousand sixes follow in succession; but if these dice
were all cogged or loaded, our surprise would cease: the particles of
matter may be compared to cogged dice, that is to say, always producing
certain determinate effects under certain given circumstances; these
particles being essentially varied in themselves, countless in their
combinations, they are cogged in myriads of different modes. The head
of Homer, or of Virgil, was no more than an assemblage of particles,
possessing peculiar properties; or if they will, of dice cogged by
nature; that is to say, of beings so combined, of matter so wrought, as
to produce the beautiful poems of the Iliad or the Aeneid. As much may
be said of all other productions: indeed, what are men themselves but
cogged dice--machines into which nature has infused the bias requisite
to produce effects of a certain description? A man of genius produces a
good work, in the same manner as a tree of a good species, placed in
a prolific soil, cultivated with care, grafted with judgment, produces
excellent fruit.

Then is it not either knavery or puerility, to talk of composing a
work by scattering letters with the hand; by promiscuously mingling
characters; or gathering together by chance, that which can only result
from a human brain, with a peculiar organization, modified after a
certain manner? The principle of human generation does not develope
itself by chance; it cannot be nourished with effect, expanded into
life, but in the womb of a woman: a confused heap of characters, a
jumble of symbols, is nothing more than an assemblage of signs, whose
proper arrangement is adequate to paint human ideas; but in order that
these ideas may be correctly delineated, it is previously requisite that
they should have been conceived, combined, nourished, connected,
and developed in the brain of a poet; where circumstances make them
fructify, mature them, and bring them forth in perfection, by reason of
the fecundity, generated by the genial warmth and the peculiar energy
of the matrix, in which these intellectual seeds shall have been placed.
Ideas in combining, expanding, connecting, and associating themselves,
form a whole, like all the other bodies of nature: this whole affords
us pleasure, becomes a source of enjoyment, when it gives birth to
agreeable sensations in the mind; when it offers to our examination
pictures calculated to move us in a lively manner. It is thus that the
history of the Trojan war, as digested in the head of Homer, ushered
into the world with all the fascinating harmony of numbers peculiar to
himself, has the power of giving a pleasurable impulse to heads, who by
their analogy with that of this incomparable Grecian, are in a capacity
to feel its beauties.

From this it will be obvious, that nothing can be produced by chance;
that no effect can exist without an adequate cause for its existence;
that the one must ever be commensurate with the other. All the works of
nature grow out of the uniform action of invariable laws, whether our
mind can with facility follow the concatenation of the successive causes
which operate; or whether, as in her more complicated productions,
we find ourselves in the impossibility of distinguishing the various
springs which she sets in motion to give birth to her phenomena. To
nature, the difficulty is not more to produce a great poet, capable of
writing an admirable poem, than to form a glittering stone or a shining
metal which gravitates towards a centre. The mode she adopts to give
birth to these various beings, is equally unknown to us, when we have
not meditated upon it; frequently the most sedulous attention, the most
patient investigation affords us no information; sometimes, however,
the unwearied industry of the philosopher is rewarded, by throwing into
light the most mysterious operations. Thus the keen penetration of a
Newton, aided by uncommon diligence, developed the starry system,
which, for so many thousand years, had eluded the research of all the
astronomers by whom he was preceded. Thus the sagacity of a Harvey
giving vigour to his application, brought out of the obscurity in which
for almost countless centuries it had been buried, the true course
pursued by the sanguinary fluid, when circulating through the veins and
arteries of man, giving activity to his machine, diffusing life
through his system, and enabling him to perform those actions which
so frequently strike an astonished world with wonder and regret. Thus
Gallileo, by a quickness of perception, a depth of reasoning peculiar to
himself, held up to an admiring world, the actual form and situation of
the planet we inhabit; which until then had escaped the observation of
the most profound geniuses--the most subtle metaphysicians--the
whole host of priests; which when first promulgated was considered
so extraordinary, so contradictory to all the then received opinions,
either sacred or profane, that he was ranked as an atheist, as an
impious blasphemer, to hold communion with whom, would secure to the
communers a place in the regions of everlasting torment; in short, it
was held an heresy of such an indelible dye, that notwithstanding the
infallibility of his sacred function, Pope Gregory, who then filled the
papal chair, excommunicated all those who had the temerity to accredit
so abominable a doctrine.

Man is born by the necessary concurrence of those elements suitable to
his construction; he increases in bulk, corroborates his system, expands
his powers, in the same manner as a plant or a stone; which as well
as himself, are augmented in their volume, invigorated in their
capabilities, by the addition of homogeneous matter, that exists within
the sphere of their attraction. Man feels, thinks, receives ideas,
acts after a certain manner, that is to say, according to his organic
structure, which is peculiar to himself; that renders him susceptible of
modifications, of which the stone and the plant are utterly incapable.
On the other hand, the organization of these beings is of a nature
to enable them to receive other modifications, which man is not more
capacitated to experience, than the stone or the plant are those which
constitute him what he is. In consequence of this peculiar arrangement,
the man of genius produces works of merit; the plant when it is healthy
yields delicious fruits the stone when it is placed in a suitable matrix
possesses a glittering brilliance which dazzles the eyes of mortals;
each in their sphere of action both surprise and delight us; because we
feel that they excite in us sensations, that harmonize with what we call
order; in consequence of the pleasure they infuse, by the rarity, by the
magnitude, and by the variety of the effects which they occasion us
to experience. Nevertheless, that which is found most admirable in the
productions of nature, that which is most esteemed in the actions of
man, most highly valued in animals, most sought after in vegetation,
most in request among fossils, is never more than the natural effects
of the different particles of matter, diversely arranged, variously
combined, submitted to numerous modifications; from matter thus united
result organs, brains, temperament, taste, talents, all the multifarious
properties, all the multitudinous qualities, which discriminate the
beings whose multiplied activity make up the sum of what is designated
animated nature.

Nature then produces nothing but what is necessary; it is not by
fortuitous combinations, by chance throws, that she exhibits to our
view the beings we behold; all her throws are sure, all the causes
she employs have infallibly their effects. Whenever she gives birth to
extraordinary, marvellous, rare beings, it is, that the requisite order
of things the concurrence of the necessary productive causes, happens
but seldom. As soon as those beings exist, they are to be ascribed to
nature, equally with the most familiar of her productions; to nature
every thing is equally possible, equally facile, when she assembles
together the instruments or the causes necessary to act. Thus it seems
presumption in man to set limits to the powers of nature, which he so
very imperfectly understands. The combinations, or if they will, the
throws that she makes in an eternity of existence, can easily produce
all the beings that have existed: her eternal march must necessarily
bring forth, again and again, the most astonishing circumstances; the
most rare occurrences; those most calculated to rouse the wonder, to
elicit the admiration of beings, who are only in a condition to give
them a momentary consideration; who can get nothing more than a glimpse,
without ever having either the leisure or the means to search into
causes, which lie hid from their weak eyes, in the depths of Cimmerian
obscurity. Countless throws during eternity, with elements and
combinations varied almost to infinity, quite with relation to man,
suffice to produce every thing of which he has a knowledge, with
multitudes of other effects, of which he will never have the least
conception.

Thus, we cannot too often repeat to the metaphysicians, to the
supporters of immateriality, to the inconsistent theologians, who
commonly ascribe to their adversaries the most ridiculous opinions, in
order to obtain an easy, short-lived triumph in the prejudiced eyes
of the multitude; or in the stagnant minds of those who never examine
deeply; that chance is nothing but a word, as well as many other words,
imagined solely to cover the ignorance of those to whom the course of
nature is inexplicable--to shield the idleness of others who are too
slothful to seek into the properties of acting causes. It is not chance
that has produced the universe, it is self-existent; nature exists
necessarily from all eternity: she is omnipotent because every thing
is produced by her energies; she is omnipresent, because she fills
all space; she is omniscient, because every thing can only be what
it actually is; she is immovable, because as a whole she cannot be
displaced; she is immutable, because her essence cannot change, although
her forms may vary; she is infinite, because she cannot have any bounds;
she is all perfect, because she contains every thing: in short, she has
all the abstract qualities of the metaphysician, all the moral faculties
of the theologian, without involving any contradiction, since that which
is the assemblage of all, must of necessity contain the properties of
all.

However concealed may be her ways, the existence of nature is
indubitable; her mode of action is in some respects known to us.
Experience amply demonstrates we might, if we were more industrious,
become better acquainted with her secrets; but with an immaterial
substance, with a pure spirit, the mind of man can never become
familiar: he has no means by which he can picture to himself this
incomprehensible, this inconceivable quality: in despite therefore of
the roundness of assertion adopted by the theologian, notwithstanding
all the subtilties of the metaphysician, it will always be for man,
while he remains such as he now is, in the language of Doctor Samuel
Clarke, that, _of which nothing can with truth be affirmed_.





CHAP. VI.

_Of Pantheism; or of the Natural Ideas of the Divinity._


The false principle that matter is not self-existent; that by its nature
it is in an impossibility to move itself; consequently incompetent to
the production of those striking phenomena which arrest our wondering
eyes in the wide expanse of the universe; it will be obvious, to all who
seriously attend to what has preceded, is the origin of the proofs
upon which theology rests the existence of immateriality. After these
suppositions, as gratuitous as they are erroneous, the fallacy of which
we have exposed elsewhere, it has been believed that matter did not
always exist, but that its existence, as well as its motion, is a
production of time; due to a cause distinguished from itself; to an
unknown agent to whom it is subordinate. As man finds in his own species
a quality which he calls intelligence, which presides over all his
actions, by the aid of which he arrives at the end he proposes to
himself; he has clothed this invisible agent with this quality, which
he has extended beyond the limits of his own conception: he magnified it
thus, because, having made him the author of effects of which he found
himself incapable, he did not conceive it possible that the intelligence
he himself possessed, unless it was prodigiously amplified, would
be sufficient to account for those productions, to which his erring
judgment led him to conclude the natural energy of physical causes were
not adequate.

As this agent was invisible, as his mode of action was inconceivable, he
made him a spirit, a word that really means nothing more than that he
is ignorant of his essence, or that he acts like the breath of which
he cannot trace the motion. Thus, in speaking of spirituality, he
designated an occult quality, which he deemed suitable to a concealed
being, whose mode of action was always imperceptible to the senses. It
would appear, however, that originally the word spirit was not meant to
designate immateriality; but a matter of a more subtile nature than
that which acted coarsely on the organs: still of a nature capable
of penetrating the grosser matter--of communicating to it
motion--of instilling into it active life--of giving birth to those
combinations--of imparting to them those modifications, which his
organic structure rendered him competent to discover. Such was, as
has been shewn, that all-powerful Jupiter, who in the theology of the
ancients, was originally destined to represent the etherial, subtile
matter that penetrates, vivifies, and gives activity to all the bodies
of which nature is the common assemblage.

It would be grossly deceiving ourselves to believe that the idea of
spirituality, such as the subtilty of dreaming metaphysicians present it
in these days, was that which offered itself to our forefathers in the
early stages of the human mind. This immateriality, which excludes all
analogy with any thing but itself--which bears no resemblance to any
thing of which man is capacitated to have a knowledge, was, as we have
already observed, the slow, the tardy fruit of his imagination, after
he had quitted experience, and renounced his reason. Men reared in
luxurious leisure, unceasingly meditating, without the assistance
of those natural helps with which attentive observation would
have furnished them, by degrees arrived at the formation of this
incomprehensible quality, which is so fugitive, that although man has
been compelled to reverence it, to accredit it against all the evidence
of his senses, they have never yet been enabled to give any other
explanation of its nature, than by using a term to which it is
impossible to attach any intelligible idea. Seraphis said, with tears
in his eyes, "that in making him adopt the opinion of spirituality, they
had deprived him of his God." Many fathers of the church have given a
human form to the Divinity, and treated all those as heretics who made
him spiritual. Thus by dint of reasoning, by force of subtilizing, the
word spirit no longer presents any one image upon which the mind can fix
itself; when they are desirous to speak of it, it becomes impossible
to understand them, seeing that each visionary paints it after his own
manner; and in the portrait he forms, consults only his own temperament,
follows nothing but his own imagination, adopts nothing but his own
peculiar reveries; the only point in which they are at all in unison, is
in assigning to it inconceivable qualities, which they naturally
enough believe are best suited to the incomprehensible beings they have
delineated: from the incompatible heap of these qualities, generally
resulted a whole, whose existence they thus rendered impossible. In
short, this word, which has occupied the research of so many learned and
intelligent men; which is considered of such importance to mankind, has
been, in consequence of theological reveries, always fluctuating:
these never bearing the least resemblance to each other, it has become
destitute of any fixed sense, a mere sound, to which each who echoes it
affixes his own peculiar ideas, which are never in harmony with those of
his neighbour; which indeed are not even steady in himself, but like
the camelion, assume the colour of every differing circumstance. This
unintelligible word has been substituted for the more intelligible
one of matter; man, when clothed with power, has entertained the most
rancorous antipathies, pursued the most barbarous persecutions, against
those who have not been enabled to contemplate this changeable idea
under the same point of view with himself.

There have, however, been men who had sufficient courage to resist this
torrent of opinion--to oppose themselves to this delirium; who have
believed, that the object which was announced as the most important
for mortals, as the sole object worthy of their thoughts, demanded an
attentive examination; who apprehended that if experience could be of
any utility, if judgment could afford any advantage, if reason was of
any use whatever, it must, most unquestionably be, to consider this
quality so opposed to every thing in nature, which was said to regulate
all the beings which she contains. These quickly saw they could not
subscribe to the general opinion of the uninformed, who never examine
any thing, who take every thing upon the credit of others; much less was
it consistent with sound sense to agree with their guides, who, either
deceivers or deceived, forbade others to submit it to the scrutiny of
reason; who were themselves frequently in an utter incapacity to pass it
under such an ordeal. Thus some thinkers, disgusted with the obscure
and contradictory notions which others had through habit mechanically
attached to this incomprehensible property, had the temerity to shake
off the yoke which had been imposed upon them from their infancy:
calling reason to their aid against those terrors with which they
alarmed the ignorant, revolting at the hideous descriptions under which
they attempted to defend their hypothesis, they had the intrepidity to
tear the veil of delusion; to rend asunder the barriers of imposture;
they considered with calm resolution, this formidable prejudice,
contemplated with a serene eye this unsupported opinion, examined with
cool deliberation this fluctuating notion, which had become the object
of all the hopes, the source of all the fears, the spring of all the
quarrels which distracted the mind, and disturbed the harmony of blind,
confiding mortals.

The result of these inquiries has uniformly been, a conviction that no
rational proof has ever been adduced in support of this hypothesis;
that from the nature of the thing itself, none can be offered; that
an incorporeity is inconceivable to corporeal beings; that these only
behold nature acting after invariable laws, in which every thing is
material; that all the phenomena of which the world is the theatre,
spring out of natural causes; that man as well as all the other beings
is the work or this nature, is only an instrument in her hand, obliged
to accomplish the eternal decrees of an imperious necessity.

Whatever efforts the philosopher makes to penetrate the secrets of
nature, he never finds more, as we have many times repeated, than
matter; various in itself, diversely modified in consequence of the
motion it undergoes. Its whole, as well as its parts, displays only
necessary causes producing necessary effects, which flow necessarily
one out of the other: of which the mind, aided by experience, is more
or less competent to discover the concatenation. In virtue of their
specific properties, all the beings that come under our review,
gravitate towards a centre--attract analogous matter--repel that which
is unsuitable to combination--mutually receive and give impulse--acquire
qualities--undergo modifications which maintain them in existence for a
season--are born and dissolved by the operation of an inexorable
decree, that obliges every thing, we behold to pass into a new mode of
existence. It is to these continued vicissitudes that are to be
ascribed all the phenomena, whether trivial or of magnitude; ordinary
or extraordinary; known or unknown; simple or complicated; which are
operated in the universe. It is by these mutations alone that we have
any knowledge of nature: she is only mysterious to those who contemplate
her through the veil of prejudice: her course is always simple to those
who look at her without prepossession.

To attribute the effects to which we are witnesses, to nature, to
matter, variously combined with the motion that is inherent to it, is
to give them an intelligible and known cause; to attempt to penetrate
deeper, is to plunge ourselves into imaginary regions, where we find
only a chaos of obscurities--where we are lost in an unfathomable abyss
of incertitude. Let us then be content with contemplating nature, who,
being self-existent, must in her essence possess motion; which cannot
be conceived without properties, from which result perpetual action
and re-action; or those continual efforts which give birth to such a
numerous train of circumstances; in which a single molecule cannot be
found, that does not necessarily occupy the place assigned to it, by
immutable and necessary laws--that is for an instant in an absolute
state of repose. What necessity can there exist to seek out of matter
for a power to give it play, since its motion flows as necessarily out
of its existence as its bulk, its form, its gravity, &c. since nature in
inaction would no longer be nature?

If it be demanded, How can we figure to ourselves, that matter by its
own peculiar energy can produce all the effects we witness? I shall
reply, that if by matter it is obstinately determined to understand
nothing but a dead, inert mass, destitute of every property, incapable
of moving itself, we shall no longer have a single idea of matter; we
shall no longer be able to account for any thing. As soon, however,
as it exists, it must have properties; as soon as it has properties,
without which it could not exist, it must act by virtue of those
properties; since it is only by its action we can have a knowledge of
its existence, be conscious of its properties. It is evident that if
by matter be understood that which it is not, or if its existence
be denied, those phenomena which strike our visual organs cannot be
attributed to it. But if by nature be understood (that which she really
is), an heap of existing matter, possessing various properties, we shall
be obliged to acknowledge that nature must be competent to move herself;
by the diversity of her motion, must have the capability, independent
of foreign aid, to produce the effects we behold; we shall find that
nothing can be made from nothing; that nothing is made by chance; that
the mode of action of every particle of matter, however minute, is
necessarily determined by its own peculiar, or by its individual
properties.

We have elsewhere said, that that which cannot be annihilated--that
which in its nature is indestructible--cannot have been inchoate, cannot
have had a beginning to its existence, but exists necessarily from all
eternity; contains within itself a sufficient cause for its own peculiar
existence. It becomes then perfectly useless to seek out of nature a
cause for her action which is in some respects known to us; with which
indefatigable research may, judging of the future by the past, render us
more familiar. As we know some of the general properties of matter;
as we can discover some of its qualities, wherefore should we seek its
motion in an unintelligible cause, of which we are not in a condition to
become acquainted with any one of its properties? Can we conceive that
immateriality could ever draw matter from its own source? Impossible; it
is not within the grasp of human intellect. If creation is an eduction
from nothing, there must have been a time when matter had not existence;
there must consequently be a time when it will cease to be: this latter
is acknowledged by many theologians themselves to be impossible. Do
those who are continually talking of this mysterious act of omnipotence,
by which a mass of matter has been, all at once, substituted to nothing,
perfectly understand what they tell us? Is there a man on earth who
conceives that a being devoid of extent can exist, become the cause of
the existence of beings who have extent--act upon matter--draw it
from his own peculiar essence--set it in motion? In truth, the more we
consider theology, the more we must be convinced that it has invented
words destitute of sense; substituted sounds to intelligible realities.

For want of consulting experience, for want or studying nature, for
want of examining the material world, we have plunged ourselves into an
intellectual vacuum, which we have peopled with chimeras, We have not
stooped to consider matter, to study its different periods, to follow it
through its numerous, changes. We have either ridiculously or knavishly
confounded dissolution, decomposition, the separation of the elementary
particles of bodies, with their radical destruction; we have been
unwilling to see that the elements are indestructible; although the
forms are fleeting, and depend upon transitory combination. We have
not distinguished the change of figure, the alteration of position, the
mutation of texture, to which matter is liable, from its annihilation,
which is impossible; we have falsely concluded, that matter Was not a
necessary being--that it commenced to exist--that this existence was
derived from that which possessed nothing in common with itself--that
that which was not substance, could give birth to that which is. Thus an
unintelligible name has been substituted for matter, which furnishes us
with true ideas of nature; of which at each instant we experience the
influence, of which we undergo the action, of which we feel the power,
and of which we should have a much better knowledge, if our abstract
opinions did not continually fasten a bandage over our eyes.

Indeed the most simple notions of philosophy shew us, that, although
bodies change and disappear, nothing is however lost in nature; the
various produce of the decomposition of a body serves for elements,
supplies materials, forms the basis, lays the foundation for accretions,
contributes to the maintenance of other bodies. The whole of nature
subsists, and is conserved only by the circulation, the transmigration,
the exchange, the perpetual displacement of insensible atoms--the
continual mutation of the sensible combinations of matter. It is by
this palingenesia, this regeneration, that the great whole, the mighty
macrocosm subsists; who, like the Saturn of the ancients, is perpetually
occupied with devouring her own children.

It will not then be inconsistent with observation, repugnant to reason,
contrary to good sense, to acknowledge that matter is self-existent;
that it acts by an energy peculiar to itself; that it will never be
annihilated. Let us then say, that matter is eternal; that nature has
been, is, and ever will be occupied with producing and destroying;
with doing and undoing; with combining and separating; in short, with
following a system of laws resulting from its necessary existence. For
every thing that she doth, she needs only to combine the elements of
matter; these, essentially diverse, necessarily either attract or repel
each other; come into collision, from whence results either their
union or dissolution; by the same laws that one approximates, the other
recedes from their respective spheres of action. It is thus that she
brings forth plants, fossils, animals, men; thus she gives existence
to organized, sensible, thinking beings, as well as to those who are
destitute of either feeling or thought. All these act for the season of
their respective duration, according to immutable laws, determined by
their various properties; arising out of their configuration; depending
on their masses; resulting from their ponderosity, &c. Here is the true
origin of every thing which is presented to our view; this indicates
the mode by which nature, according to her own peculiar powers, is in
a state to produce all those astonishing effects which assail our
wondering eyes; all that phenomena to which mankind is the witness; as
well as all the bodies who act diversely upon the organs with which
he is furnished, of which he can only judge according to the manner in
which these organs are affected. He says they are good, when they are
analogous to his own mode of existence--when they contribute to the
maintenance of the harmony of his machine: he says they are bad, when
they disturb this harmony. It is thus he ascribes views, ideas, designs,
to the being he supposes to be the power by which nature is moved;
although all the experience we are able to collect, unequivocally
proves, that she acts after an invariable, eternal code of laws.

Nature is destitute of those views which actuate man; she acts
necessarily, because she exists: her system is immutable, and founded
upon the essence of things. It is the essence of the seed of the
male, composed of primitive elements, which serve for the basis of an
organized being, to unite itself with that of the female; to fructify
it; to produce, by this combination, a new organized being; who, feeble
in his origin, not having yet acquired a sufficient quantity of material
particles to give him consistence, corroborates himself by degrees;
strengthens himself by the daily accretion of analogous matter; is
nourished by the modifications appropriate to his existence: matured
by the continuation of circumstances calculated to give vigour to
his frame; thus he lives, thinks, acts, engenders in his turn other
organized beings similar to himself. By a consequence of his temperament
and of physical laws, this generation does not take place, except when
the circumstances necessary to its production find themselves united.
Thus this procreation is not operated by chance; the animal does not
fructify, but with an animal of his own species, because this is the
only one analogous to himself, who unites the qualities, who combines
the circumstances, suitable to produce a being resembling himself;
without this he would not produce any thing, or he would only give
birth to a being who would be denominated a monster, because it would be
dissimilar to himself. It is of the essence of the grain of plants, to
be impregnated by the pollen or seed of the stygma of the flower; in
this state of copulation they in consequence develope themselves in
the bowels of the earth; expand by the aid of water; shoot forth by
the accession of heat; attract analogous particles to corroborate their
system: thus by degrees they form a plant, a shrub, a tree, susceptible
of that life, filled with that motion, capable of that action which
is suitable to vegetable existence. It is of the essence of particular
particles of earth, homogeneous in their nature, when separated by
circumstances, attenuated by water, elaborated by heat, to unite
themselves in the bosom of mountains, with other atoms which are
analogous; to form by their aggregation, according to their various
affinities, those bodies possessing more or less solidity; having more
or less purity, which are called diamonds, chrystals, stones, metals,
minerals. It is of the essence of exhalations raised by the heat of
the atmosphere, to combine, to collect themselves, to dash against each
other, and either by their union or their collision to produce meteors,
to generate thunder. It is of the essence of some inflammable matter
to gather itself together, to ferment in the caverns of the earth, to
increase its active force by augmenting its heat, and then explode,
by the accession of other matter suitable to the operation, with that
tremendous force which we call earthquakes; by which mountains are
destroyed; cities overturned; the inhabitants of the plains thrown into
a state of consternation; these full of alarm, unused to meditate on
natural effects, unconscious of the extent of physical powers, stretch
forth their hands in dismay, heave the most desponding sighs, utter
aloud their complaints, and earnestly implore a cessation of those
evils, which nature, acting by necessary laws, obliges them to
experience as necessarily as she does those benefits by which she fills
them with the most extravagant joy. In short, it is of the essence of
certain climates to produce men so organized, whose temperament is so
modified, that they become either extremely useful or very prejudicial
to their species, in the same manner as it is the property of certain
portions of the land, to bring forth either delicious fruits or
dangerous poisons.

In all this nature acts necessarily; she pursues an undeviating course,
which we are bound to consider the perfection of wisdom; because she
exists necessarily, has her modes of action determined by certain,
invariable laws, which themselves flow out of the constituent properties
of the various beings she contains, and those circumstances, which the
eternal motion she is in must necessarily bring about. It is ourselves
who have a necessary aim, which is our own conservation; it is by this
that we regulate all the ideas we form to ourselves of the causes acting
in nature; it is according to this standard we judge of every thing
we see or feel. Animated ourselves, existing after a certain manner,
possessing a soul endowed with rare and peculiar qualities, we, like the
savage, ascribe a soul and animated life to every thing that acts upon
us. Thinking and intelligent ourselves, we give these, faculties to
those beings whom we suppose to be more powerful than mortals; but as we
see the generality of matter incapable of modifying itself, we suppose
it must receive its impulse from some concealed agent, some external
cause, which our imagination pictures as similar to ourselves.
Necessarily attracted by that which is advantageous to us, repelling by
an equal necessity that which is prejudicial to our manner of existence;
we cease to reflect that our modes of feeling are due to our peculiar
organization, modified by physical causes: in this state, either of
inattention or ignorance, we mistake the natural results of our own
peculiar structure, for instruments employed by a being whom we clothe
with our own passions--whom we suppose actuated by our own views--who,
possessing our ideas, embraces a mode of thinking and acting similar to
ourselves.

If after this it be asked, What is the end of nature? We shall reply
that on this head we are ignorant; that it is more than probable no man
will ever fathom the secret; but we shall also say, it is evidently to
exist, to act, to conserve her whole. If then it be demanded, Wherefore
she exists? We shall again reply, of this we know nothing at present,
possibly never shall; but we shall also say, she exists necessarily,
that her operations, her motion, her phenomena, are the necessary
consequences of her necessary existence. There necessarily exists
something; this is nature or the universe, this nature necessarily acts
as she does. If it be wished to substitute any other word for nature,
the question will still remain as it did, as to the cause of her
existence; the end she has in view. It is not by changing of terms that
a geometrician can solve problems; one word will throw no more light
on a subject than another, unless that word carries a certain degree
of conviction in the ideas which it generates. As long as we speak of
matter, if we cannot develope all its properties, we shall at least have
fixed, determinate ideas; something tangible, of which we have a slight
knowledge, that we can submit to the examination of our senses: but
from the moment we begin to talk of immateriality, of incorporeity,
from thence our ideas become confused; we are lost in a labyrinth of
conjecture--we have no one means of seizing the subject on any
side--we are, after the most elaborate arguments, after the most subtle
reasoning, obliged to acknowledge we cannot form the most slender
opinion respecting it, that has any thing substantive for its support.
In short, that it is precisely that thing "of which every thing may be
denied, but of which nothing can with truth be affirmed." Let us clothe
this incomprehensible being with whatever qualities we may, it will be
always in ourselves we seek the model; they will be our own faculties
that we delineate, our own passions that we describe. In like manner
man, as long as he is ignorant, will always conjecture that it is for
himself alone the universe was formed; not withstanding, he has nothing
more to do, than to open his eyes in order to be undeceived. He will
then see, that he undergoes a common destiny, equally partakes with all
other beings of the benefits, shares with them without exception the
evils of life; like them he is submitted to an imperious necessity,
inexorable in its decrees; which is itself nothing more than the sum
total of those laws which nature herself is obliged to follow.

Thus every thing proves that nature, or matter, exists necessarily; that
it cannot in any moment swerve from those laws imposed upon it by its
existence. If it cannot be annihilated, it cannot have been inchoate.
The theologian himself agrees that it requires a miracle to annihilate
an atom. But is it possible to derogate from the necessary laws of
existence? Can that which exists necessarily, act but according to the
laws peculiar to itself? Miracle is another word invented to shield our
own sloth, to cover our own ignorance; it is that by which we wish to
designate those rare occurrences, those solitary effects of natural
causes, whose infrequency do not afford us means of diving into their
springs. It is only saying by another expression, that an unknown cause
hath by modes which we cannot trace, produced an uncommon effect which
we did not expect, which therefore appears strange to us. This granted,
the intervention of words, far from removing the ignorance in which we
found ourselves with respect to the power and capabilities of nature,
only serves to augment it, to give it more durability. The creation
of matter becomes to our mind as incomprehensible, and appears as
impossible as its annihilation.

Let us then conclude that all those words which do not present to the
mind any determinate idea, ought to be banished the language of those
who are desirous of speaking so as to be understood; that abstract
terms, invented by ignorance, are only calculated to satisfy men
destitute of experience; who are too slothful to study nature, too timid
to search into her ways; that they are suitable only to content those
enthusiasts, whose curious imagination pleases itself with making
fruitless endeavours to spring beyond the visible world; who occupy
themselves with chimeras of their own creation: in short, that these
words are useful only to those whose sole profession it is to feed the
ears of the uninformed with pompous sounds, that are not comprehended
by themselves--upon the sense of which they are in a state of perpetual
hostility with each other--upon the true meaning of which they have
never yet been able to come to a common agreement; which each sees after
his own peculiar manner of contemplating objects, in which there never
was, nor probably never will be, the least harmony of feeling.

Man is a material being; he cannot consequently have any ideas, but of
that which like himself is material; that is to say, of that which is
in a capacity to act upon his organs, which has some qualities analogous
with his own. In despite of himself, he always assigns material
properties to his gods; the impossibility he finds in compassing them,
has made him suppose them to be spiritual; distinguished from the
material world. Indeed he, must be content, either not to understand
himself, or he must have material ideas of the Divinity; the human mind
may torture itself as long as it pleases, it will never, after all its
efforts, be enabled to comprehend, that material effects can emanate
from immaterial causes; or that such causes can have any relation with
material beings. Here is the reason why man, as we have seen, believes
himself obliged to give to his gods, these morals which he so much so
highly esteems, in those beings of his race, who are fortunate enough
to possess them: he forgets that a being who is spiritual, adopting the
theological hypothesis, cannot from thence either have his organization,
or his ideas; that it cannot think in his mode, nor act after his
manner; that consequently it cannot possess what he calls intelligence,
wisdom, goodness, anger, justice, &c. as he himself understands those
terms. Thus, in truth, the moral qualities with which he has clothed
the Divinity, supposes him material, and the most abstract
theological notions, are, after all, founded upon a direct, undeniable
_Anthropomorphism_.

In despite of all their subtilties, the theologians cannot do otherwise;
like all the beings of the human species, they have a knowledge of
matter alone: they have no real idea of a pure spirit. When they speak
of the intelligence, of the wisdom, of the designs of their gods, they
are always those of men which they describe, that they obstinately
persist in giving to beings, of which, according to their own shewing,
to the evidence they themselves adduce, their essence does not render
them susceptible; who if they had those qualities with which they clothe
them, would from that very moment cease to be incorporeal; would be in
the truest sense of the word, substantive matter. How shall we reconcile
the assertion, that beings who have not occasion for any thing--who are
sufficient to them selves--whose projects must be executed as soon as
they are formed; can have volition, passions, desires? How shall we
attribute anger to beings without either blood or bile? How can we
conceive an omnipotent being (whose wisdom we admire in the striking
order he has himself established in the universe,) can permit that this
beautiful arrangement should be continually disturbed, either by the
elements in discord, or by the crimes of human beings? In short, this
being cannot have any one of the human qualities, which always depend
upon the peculiar organization of man--upon his wants--upon his
institutions, which are themselves always relative to the society
in which he lives. The theologian vainly strives to aggrandize, to
exaggerate in idea, to carry to perfection by dint of abstraction, the
moral qualities of man; they are unsuitable to the Divinity; in vain it
is asserted they are in him of a different nature from what they are
in his creatures; that they are perfect; infinite; supreme; eminent; in
holding this language, they no longer understand themselves; they can
have no one idea of the qualities they are describing, seeing that
man can never have a conception of them, but inasmuch as they bear an
analogy to the same qualities in himself.

It is thus that by force of metaphysical subtilty, mortals have no
longer any fixed, any determinate idea of the beings to which they have
given birth. But little contented with understanding physical causes,
with contemplating active nature; weary of examining matter, which
experience proves is competent to the production of every thing, man
has been desirous to despoil it of the energy which it is its essence
to possess, in order to invest it in a pure spirit; in an immaterial
substance; which he is under the necessity of re-making a material
being, whenever he has an inclination either to form an idea of it to
himself, or make it understood by others. In assembling the parts
of man, which he does no more than enlarge, which he swells out to
infinity, he believes he forms an immaterial being, who, for that
reason, acquires the capability of performing all those phenomena, with
the true causes of which he is ignorant; nevertheless those operations
of which he does comprehend the spring, he as sedulously denies to be
due to the powers of this being; time, therefore, according to these
ideas, as he advances the progress of science, as he further developes
the secrets of nature, is continually diminishing the number of actions
ascribed to this being--is constantly circumscribing his sphere of
action. It is upon the model of the human soul that he forms the soul
of nature, or that secret agent from which she receives impulse. After
having made himself double, he makes nature in like manner twofold, and
then he supposes she is vivified by an intelligence, which he borrows
from himself, Placed in an impossibility of becoming acquainted with
this agent, as well as with that which he has gratuitously distinguished
from his own body; he has invented the word spiritual to cover up
his ignorance; which is only in other words avowing it is a substance
entirely unknown to him. From that moment, however, he has no ideas
whatever of what he himself has done; because he first clothes it with
all the qualities he esteems in his fellows, and then destroys them by
an assurance, that they in no wise resemble the qualities he has been
so anxious to bestow. To remedy this inconvenience, he concludes this
spiritual substance much more noble than matter; that its prodigious
subtilty, which he calls simplicity, but which is only the effect
of metaphysical abstraction, secures it from decomposition, from
dissolution, from all those revolutions, to which material bodies, as
produced by nature, are evidently exposed.

It is thus, that man always prefers the marvellous to the simple; the
unintelligible to the intelligible; that which he cannot comprehend, to
that which is within the range of his understanding; he despises those
objects which are familiar to him; he estimates those alone with which
he is incapable of having any intercourse: that of which he has only
confused vague ideas, he concludes must contain something important for
him to know--must have something supernatural in its construction.
In short, he needs mystery to move his imagination--to exercise his
mind--to feed his curiosity; which never labours harder, than when it is
occupied with enigmas impossible to be guessed at; which from that very
circumstance, he judges to be extremely worthy of his research.
This, without doubt, is the reason he looks upon matter, which he
has continually under his eyes, which he sees perpetually in action,
eternally changing its form, as a contemptible thing--as a contingent
being, that does not exist necessarily; consequently, that cannot exist
independently: this is the reason why he has imagined a spirit, which he
will never be able to conceive; which on that account he declares to be
superior to matter; which he roundly asserts to be anterior to nature,
and the only self-existent being. The human wind found food in these
mystical ideas, they unceasingly occupied it; the imagination had play,
it embellished them after its own manner: ignorance fed itself with the
fables to which these mysteries gave rise; habit identified them with
the existence of man himself: when each could ask the other concerning
these ideas, without any one being in a capacity to return a direct
answer, he felt himself gratified, he immediately concluded that the
general impossibility of reply stamped them with the wondrous faculty
of immediately interesting his welfare; of involving his most prominent
interests, more than all the things put together, with which he had
any possible means of becoming intimately acquainted. Thus they became
necessary to his happiness; he believed he fell into a vacuum without
them; he became the decided enemy to all those who endeavoured to lead
him back to nature, which he had learned to despise; to consider only as
an impotent mass, an heap of inert matter, not possessing any energy
but what it received from causes exterior to itself; as a contemptible
assemblage of fragile combinations, whose forms were continually subject
to perish.

In distinguishing nature from her mover, man has fallen into the same
absurdity as when he separated his soul from his body; life from the
living being; the faculty of thought from the thinking being: deceived
on his own peculiar nature, having taken up an erroneous opinion upon
the energy of his own organs, he has in like manner been deceived upon
the organization of the universe; he has distinguished nature from
herself; the life of nature from living nature; the action of nature
from active nature. It was this soul of the world--this energy of
nature--this principle of activity, which man first personified, then
separated by abstraction; sometimes decorated with imaginary attributes;
sometimes with qualities borrowed from his own peculiar essence. Such
were the aerial materials of which man availed himself to construct the
incomprehensible, immaterial substances, which have filled the world
with disputes--which have divided man from his fellow--which to this day
he has never been able to define, even to his own satisfaction. His own
soul was the model. Deceived upon the nature of this, he never had any
just ideas of the Divinity, who was, in his mind, nothing more than a
copy exaggerated or disfigured to that degree, as to make him mistake
the prototype upon which it had been originally formed.

If, because man has distinguished himself from his own existence, it has
been impossible for him ever to form to himself any true idea of his
own nature; it is also because he has distinguished nature from herself,
that both herself and her ways have been mistaken. Man has ceased to
study nature, that he might, recur by thought to a substance which
possesses nothing in common with her; this substance he has made the
mover of nature, without which she would not be capable of any thing; to
whom every thing that takes place in her system, must be attributed;
the conduct of this being has appeared mysterious, has been held up as
marvellous, because he seemed to be a continual contradiction: when if
man had but recurred to the immutability of the laws of nature, to the
invariable system she pursues, all would have appeared intelligible;
every thing would have been reconciled; the apparent contrariety
would have vanished. By thus taking a wrong view of things, wisdom and
intelligence appeared to be opposed by confusion and disorder; goodness
to be rendered nugatory by evil; while all is only just what it must
inevitably be, under the given circumstances. In consequence of these
erroneous opinions, in the place of applying himself to the study of
nature, to discover the method of obtaining her favors, or to seek the
means of throwing aside his misfortunes; in the room of consulting his
experience; in lieu of labouring usefully to his own happiness; he has
been only occupied with expecting these things by channels through
which they do not flow; he has been disputing upon objects be never can
understand, while he has totally neglected that which was within the
compass of his own powers; which he might have rendered propitious to
his views, by a more industrious application of his own talent; by a
patient investigation, for the purpose of drawing at the fountain of
truth, the limpid balsam that alone can heal the sorrows or his heart.

Nothing could be well more prejudicial to his race, than this
extravagant theory; which, as we shall prove, has become the source of
innumerable evils. Man has been for thousands of years trembling before
idols of his own creation--bowing down before them with the most servile
homage--occupied with disarming their wrath--sedulously employed in
propitiating their kindness, without ever advancing a single step on
the road he so much desires to travel. He will perhaps continue the same
course for centuries to come, unless by some unlooked for exertion on
his part, he shall happen to discard the prejudices which blind him; to
lay aside his enthusiasm for the marvellous; to quit his fondness for
the enigmatical; rally round the standard of his reason: unless, taking
experience for his guide, he march undauntedly forward under the banner
of truth, and put to the rout that host of unintelligible jargon, under
the cumbrous load of which he has lost sight of his own happiness;
which has but too frequently prevented him from seeking the only means
adequate either to satisfy his wants, or to ameliorate the evils which
he is necessarily obliged to experience.

Let us then re-conduct bewildered mortals to the altar of nature; let us
endeavour to destroy that delusion which the ignorance of man, aided by
a disordered imagination, has induced him to elevate to her throne; let
us strive to dissipate that heavy mist which obscures to him the paths
of truth; let us seek to banish from his mind those visionary ideas
which prevent him from giving activity to his experience; let us teach
him if possible not to seek out of nature herself, the causes of the
phenomena he admires--to rest satisfied that she contains remedies for
all his evils--that she has manifold benefits in store for those, who,
rallying their industry, are willingly patiently to investigate her
laws--that she rarely withholds her secrets from the researches of those
who diligently labour to unravel them. Let us assure him that reason
alone can render him happy; that reason is nothing more than the science
of nature, applied to the conduct of man in society; that this reason
teaches that every thing is necessary; that his pleasures as well as
his sorrows are the effects of nature, who in all her works follows only
laws which nothing can make her revoke; that his interest demands he
should learn to support with equanimity of mind, all those evils
which natural means do not enable him to put aside. In short, let us
unceasingly repeat to him, it is in rendering his fellow creature happy,
that he will himself arrive at a felicity he will in vain expect from
others, when his own conduct refuses it to him.

Nature is self-existent; she will always exist; she produces every
thing; contains within herself the cause of every thing; her motion is a
necessary consequence of her existence; without motion we could form
no conception of nature; under this collective name we designate the
assemblage of matter acting by virtue of its peculiar energies. Every
thing proves to us, that it is not out of nature man ought to seek the
Divinity. If we have only an incomplete knowledge of nature and her
ways--if we have only superficial, imperfect ideas of matter, how shall
we be able to flatter ourselves with understanding or having any certain
notions of immateriality, of beings so much more fugitive, so much more
difficult to compass, even by thought, than the material elements;
so much more shy of access than either the constituent principles of
bodies, their primitive properties, their various modes of acting, or
their different manner of existing? If we cannot recur to first causes,
let its content ourselves with second causes, with those effects which
we can submit to experience, let us collect the facts with which we have
an acquaintance; they will enable us to judge of what we do not know:
let us at least confine ourselves to the feeble glimmerings of truth
with which our senses furnish us, since we do not possess means whereby
to acquire broader masses of light.

Do not let us mistake for real sciences, those which have no other
basis than our imagination; we shall find that such can at most be but
visionary: let us cling close to nature which we see, which we feel,
of which we experience the action; of which at least we understand the
general laws. If we are ignorant of her detail, if we cannot fathom the
secret principles she employs in her most complicated productions,
we are at least certain she acts in a permanent, uniform, analogous,
necessary manner. Let us then observe this nature; let us watch her
movements; but never let us endeavour to quit the routine she prescribes
for the beings of our species: if we do, we shall not only be obliged to
return, but we shall also infallibly be punished with numberless errors,
which will darken our mind, estrange us from reason; the necessary
consequence will be countless sorrows, which we may otherwise avoid.
Let us consider we are sensible parts of a whole, in which the forms are
only produced to be destroyed; in which combinations are ushered into
life, that they may again quit it, after having subsisted for a longer
or a shorter season. Let us look upon nature as an immense elaboratory
which contains every thing necessary for her action; who lacks nothing
requisite for the production of all the phenomena she displays to our
sight. Let us acknowledge her power to be inherent in her essence; amply
commensurate to her eternal march; fully adequate to the happiness of
all the beings she contains. Let us consider her as a whole, who can
only maintain herself by what we call the discord of the elements; that
she exists by the continual dissolution and re-union of her parts; that
from this springs the universal harmony; that from this the general
stability has its birth. Let us then re-establish omnipotent nature, so
long mistaken by man, in her legitimate rights. Let us place her on that
adamantine throne, which it is for the felicity of the human race she
should occupy. Let us surround her with those ministers who can never
deceive, who can never forfeit our confidence--_Justice and Practical
Knowledge_. Let us listen to her eternal voice; she neither speaks
ambiguously, nor in an unintelligible language; she may be easily
comprehended by the people of all nations; because _Reason_ is her
faithful interpreter. She offers nothing to our contemplation but
immutable truths. Let us then for ever impose silence on that enthusiasm
which leads us astray; let us put to the blush that imposture which
would riot on our credulity; let us discard that gloomy superstition,
which has drawn us aside from the only worship suitable to intelligent
beings. Above all, never let us forget that the temple of happiness can
only be reached through the groves of virtue, which surround it on every
side; that the paths which lead to these beautiful walks can only be
entered by the road of experience, the portals of which are alone opened
to those who apply to them the key of truth: this key is of very simple
structure, has no complicated intricacy of wards, and is easily formed
on the anvil of social intercourse, merely by _not doing unto others
that which you would not wish they should do unto you._





CHAP. VII.

_Of Theism.--Of the System of Optimism.--Of final Causes_.


Very few men have either the courage or the industry to examine
opinions, which every one is in agreement to acknowledge; there is
scarcely any one who ventures to doubt their truth, even when no solid
arguments have been adduced in their support. The natural supineness
of man readily receives them without examination upon the authority
of others--communicates them to his successors in the season of their
infancy; thus is transmitted from race to race, notions which once
having obtained the sanction of time, are contemplated as clothed with
a sacred character, although perhaps to an unprejudiced mind, who should
be bent on searching into their foundation, no proofs will appear, that
they ever were verified. It is thus with immateriality: it has passed
current from father to son for many ages, without these having done any
thing more than habitually consign to their brain those obscure ideas
which were at first attached to it, which it is evident, from the
admission even of its advocates, can never be removed, to admit others
of a more enlightened nature. Indeed how can it possibly be, that light
can be thrown upon an incomprehensible subject: each therefore modifies
it after his own manner; each gives it that colouring that most
harmonizes with his own peculiar existence; each contemplates it under
that perspective which is the issue of his own particular vision: this
from the nature of things cannot be the same in every individual: there
must then of necessity be a great contrariety in the opinions resulting.
It is thus also that each man forms to himself a God in particular,
after his own peculiar temperament--according to his own natural
dispositions: the individual circumstances under which he is found, the
warmth of his imagination, the prejudices he has received, the mode in
which he is at different times affected, have all their influence in the
picture he forms. The contented, healthy man, does not see him with the
same eyes as the man who is chagrined and sick; the man with a heated
blood, who has an ardent imagination, or is subject to bile, does not
pourtray him under the same traits as he who enjoys a more peaceable
soul, who has a cooler fancy, who is of a more phlegmatic habit. This is
not all; even the same individual does not view him in the same manner
at different periods of his life: he undergoes all the variations of
his machine--all the revolutions of his temperament--all those continual
vicissitudes which his existence experiences. The idea of the Divinity
is said to be innate; on the contrary, it is perpetually fluctuating in
the mind of each individual; varies every moment in all the beings
of the human species; so much so, that there are not two who admit
precisely the same Deity; there is not a single one, who, under
different circumstances, does not see him variously.

Do not then let us be surprised at the variety of systems adopted by
mankind on this subject; it ought not to astonish us that there is so
little harmony existing among men upon a point of such consequence; it
ought not to appear strange that so much contradiction should prevail
in the various doctrines held forth; that they should have such
little consistency, such slender connection with each other; that the
professors should dispute continually upon the rectitude of the opinions
adopted by each: they must necessarily wrangle upon that which each
contemplates so variously--upon which there is hardly a single mortal
who is constantly in accord with himself.

All men are pretty well agreed upon those objects which they are enabled
to submit to the test of experience; we do not hear any disputes upon
the principles of geometry; those truths that are evident, that are
easily demonstrable, never vary in our mind; we never doubt that
the part is less than the whole; that two and two make four; that
benevolence is an amiable quality; that equity is necessary to man in
society. But we find nothing but perpetual controversy upon all those
systems which have the Divinity for their object; they are full of
incertitude; subject to continual variations: we do not see any harmony
either in the principles of theology, or in the principles of its
graduates. Even the proofs offered of his existence have been the
subject of cavil; they have either been thought too feeble, have been
brought forward against rule, or else have not been taken up with
sufficient zeal to please the various reasoners who advocate the cause;
the corollaries drawn from the premises laid down, are not the same in
any two nations, scarcely in two individuals; the thinkers of all
ages, in all countries, are perpetually in rivalry with each other;
unceasingly quarrel upon all the points of religion; can never agree
either upon their theological hypotheses, or upon the fundamental
truths which should serve for their basis; even the attributes, the
very qualities ascribed, are as warmly contested by some, as they are
zealously defended by others.

These never-ending disputes, these perpetual variations, ought, at
least, to convince the unprejudiced, that the ideas of the Divinity have
neither the generally-admitted evidence, nor the certitude which are
attributed to them; on the contrary, these contrarieties in the opinions
of the theologians, if submitted to the logic of the schools, might be
fatal to the whole of them: according to that mode of reasoning, which
at least has the sanction of our universities, all the probabilities in
the world cannot acquire the force of a demonstration; a truth is
not made evident but when constant experience, reiterated reflection,
exhibits it always under the same point of view; the evidence of a
proposition cannot be admitted unless it carries with it a substantive
demonstration; from the constant relation which is made by well
constituted senses, results that evidence, that certitude, which alone
can produce full conviction: if the major proposition of a syllogism
should be overturned by the minor, the whole falls to the ground.
Cicero, who is no mean authority on such a subject, says expressly, "No
reasoning can render that false, which experience has demonstrated as
evident." Wolff, in his Ontology, says; "That which is repugnant in
itself, cannot possibly be understood; that those things which are in
themselves contradictions, must always be deficient of evidence." St.
Thomas says, "Being, is all that which is not repugnant to existence."

However it may be with these qualities, which the theologians assign to
their immaterial beings, whether they may be irreconcileable, or whether
they are totally incomprehensible, what can result to the human species
in supposing them to have intelligence and views? Can an universal
intelligence, whose care must be equally extended to every thing that
exists, have more direct, more intimate relations with man, who only
forms an insensible portion of the great whole? Can we seriously believe
that it is to make joyful the insects, to gratify the ants of his
garden, that the Monarch of the universe has constructed and embellished
his habitation? Would our feeble eyes, therefore, become stronger--would
our narrow views of things be enlarged--should we be better capacitated
to understand his projects--could we with more certitude divine
his plans, enter into his designs--would our exility of judgment be
competent to measure his wisdom, to follow the eternal order he has
established? Will those effects, which flow from his omnipotence,
emanate from his providence--whether we estimate them as good, or
whether we tax them as evil--whether we consider them beneficial, or
view them as prejudicial--be less the necessary results of his wisdom,
of his justice, of his eternal decrees? In this case can we reasonably
suppose that a Being, so wise, so just, so intelligent, will derange
his system, change his plan, for such weak beings as ourselves? Can we
rationally believe we have the capacity to address worthy prayers, to
make suitable requests, to point out proper modes of conduct to such a
Being? Can we at all flatter ourselves that to please us, to gratify our
discordant wishes, he will alter his immutable laws? Can we imagine
that at our entreaty he will take from the beings who surround us their
essences, their properties, their various modes of action? Have we
any right to expect he will abrogate in our behalf the eternal laws of
nature, that he will disturb her eternal march, arrest her ever-lasting
course, which his wisdom has planned; which his goodness has conferred;
which are, in fact, the admiration of mankind? Can we hope that in our
favour fire will cease to burn, when we approximate it too closely; that
fever shall not consume our habit, when contagion has penetrated our
system; that gout shall not torment us, when an intemperate mode of
life shall have amassed the humours that necessarily result from such
conduct; that an edifice tumbling in ruins shall not crush us by its
fall, when we are within the vortex of its action? Will our vain cries,
our most fervent supplications, prevent a country from being unhappy,
when it shall be devastated by an ambitious conqueror; when it shall
be submitted to the capricious will of unfeeling tyrants, who bend it
beneath the iron rod of their oppression?

If this infinite intelligence gives a free course to those events which
his wisdom has prepared; if nothing happens in this world but after
his impenetrable designs; we ought silently to submit; we have in fact
nothing to ask; we should be madmen to oppose our own weak intellect to
such capacious wisdom; we should offer an insult to his prudence if we
were desirous to regulate them. Man must not flatter himself that he
is wiser than his God; that he is in a capacity to make him change his
will; with having power to determine him to take other means than those
which he has chosen to accomplish his decrees. An intelligent Divinity
can only have taken those measures which embrace complete justice; can
only have availed himself of those means which are best calculated to
arrive at his end; if he was capable of changing them, he could neither
be called wise, immutable, nor provident. If it was to be granted,
that the Divinity did for a single instant suspend those laws which he
himself has given, if he was to change any thing in his plan, it would
be supposing he had not foreseen the motives of this suspension; that he
had not calculated the causes of this change; if he did not make these
motives enter into his plan, it would be saying he had not foreseen
the causes that render them necessary: if he has foreseen them without
making them part of his system, it would be arraigning the perfection of
the whole. Thus in whatever manner these things are contemplated, under
whatever point of view they are examined, it is evident that the
prayers which man addresses to the Divinity, which are sanctioned by the
different modes of worship, always suppose he is supplicating a being
whose wisdom and providence are defective; in fact, that his own is more
appropriate to his situation. To suppose he is capable of change in his
conduct, is to bring his omniscience into question; to vitally attack
his omnipotence; to arraign his goodness; at once to say, that he either
is not willing or not competent to judge what would be most
expedient for man; for whose sole advantage and pleasure they
will, notwithstanding, insist he created the universe: such are the
inconsistent doctrines of theology; such the imbecile efforts of
metaphysics.

It is, however, upon these notions, extravagant as they may appear,
ill directed as they assuredly are, inconclusive as they must
be acknowledged by unprejudiced minds, that are founded all the
superstitions and many of the religions of the earth. It is by no means
an uncommon sight, to see man upon his knees before an all-wise God,
whose conduct he is endeavouring to regulate; whose decrees he wishes to
avert; whose plan he is desirous to reform. These inconsistent objects
he is occupied with gaining, by means equally repugnant to sound sense;
equally injurious to the dignity of the Divinity: adopting his own
sensations as the criterion of the feelings of the Deity; in some places
he tries to win him to his interests by presents; sometimes we behold
even the princes of the earth attempting to direct his views, by
offering him splendid garments, upon which their own fatuity sets an
inordinate value, merely because they have laboured at them themselves;
some strive to disarm his justice by the most splendid pageantry; others
by practices the most revolting to humanity; some think his immutability
will yield to idle ceremonies; others to the most discordant prayers;
it not unfrequently happens that to induce him to change in their favour
his eternal decrees, those who have opposite interests to promote, each
returns him thanks for that which the others consider as the greatest
curse that can befal them. In short, man is almost every where prostrate
before an omnipotent God, who, if we were to judge by the discrepancy of
their requests, never has rendered his creatures such as they ought
to be; who to accomplish his divine views has never taken the proper
measures, who to fulfil his wisdom has continual need of the admonitions
of man, conveyed either in the form of thanks or prayers.

We see, then, that superstition is founded upon manifest contradictions,
which man must always fall into when he mistakes the natural causes of
things--when he shall attribute the good or evil which he experiences to
an intelligent cause, distinguished from nature, of which he will never
be competent to form to himself any certain ideas. Indeed, man will
always be reduced, as we have so frequently repeated, to the necessity
of clothing his gods with his own imbecile qualities: as he is himself
a changeable being, whose intelligence is limited; who, placed in divers
circumstances, appears to be frequently in contradiction with himself;
although he thinks he honours his gods in giving them his own peculiar
qualities, he in fact does nothing more than lend them his own
inconstancy, cover them with his own weakness, invest them with his own
vices. It is thus that in reasoning, he is unable to account for the
necessity of things--that he imagines there is a confusion which his
prayers will have a tendency to remove--that he thinks the evils of
life more than commensurate with the good: he does not perceive that an
undeviating system, by operating upon beings diversely organized, whose
circumstances are different, whose modes of action are at variance, must
of necessity sometimes appear to be inimical to the interests of
the individual, while it embraces the general good of the whole. The
theologian may subtilize, exaggerate, render as unintelligible as he
pleases, the attributes with which he clothes his divinities, he
will never be able to remove the contradictions which arise from the
discordant qualities which he thus heaps together; neither will he be
able to give man any other mode of judging than what arises from the
exercise of his senses, such as they are actually found. He will never
be able to furnish the idea of an immutable being, while he shall
represent this being as capable of being irritated and appeased by the
prayers of mortals. He will never delineate the features of omnipotence
under the portrait of a being who cannot restrain the actions of his
inferiors. He will never hold up a standard of justice, while he shall
mingle it with mercy, however amiable the quality; or while he shall
represent it as punishing those actions, which the perpetrators were
under the necessity of committing. Neither will he be able, under any
circumstances, to make a finite mind comprehend infinity; much less when
he shall represent this infinity as bounded by finity itself.

From this it will be obvious, that immaterial substances, such as are
depicted by the theologians, can only be looked upon as the offspring
of a metaphysical brain, unsupported by any of those proofs which are
usually required to establish the propositions laid down among men;
all the qualities which they ascribe to them, are only those which are
suitable to material substances; all the abstract properties with which
they invest them, are incomprehensible by material beings; the whole
taken together, is one confused mass of contradictions: they have held
forth to man, that it highly imported to his interests to know, to
understand these substances; he has consequently set his intellect
in action to discover some means of compassing an end, said to be so
consequential to his welfare; he has, however, been unable to make any
progress, because no clue could be offered to him of the road he must
pursue; all was mere assertion unsupported by evidence; the whole was
enveloped in complete darkness, into which the least scintillation of
light could never penetrate. Notwithstanding, as soon as man believes
himself greatly interested in knowing a thing, he labors to form to
himself an idea of that, the knowledge of which he thinks so important;
if insuperable obstacles impede his inquiries--if difficulties of a
magnitude to alarm his industry intervene--if with immense labour he
makes but little progress, then the slender success that attends
his research, aided by a slothful disposition, while it wearies
his diligence disposes him to credulity. It was thus, that a crafty
ambitious Arab, subtle and knavish in his manners, insinuating in his
address, profiting by this credulous inclination, made his countrymen
adopt his own fanciful reveries as permanent truths, of which it was not
permitted them for an instant to doubt; following up these opinions with
enthusiasm, he stimulated them on to become conquerors; obliging the
conquered to lend themselves to his system, he gave currency to a creed,
invented solely for the purpose of enslaving mankind, which now spreads
over immense regions inhabited by a numerous population, although like
other systems it does not escape sectarianism, having above seventy
branches. Thus ignorance, despair, sloth, the want of reflecting habits,
place the human race in a state of dependance upon those who build up
systems, while upon the objects which are the foundations, they have
no one settled idea: once adopted, however, whenever these systems are
brought into question, man either reasons in a very strange manner, or
else is the dupe of very deceitful arguments: when they are agitated,
and he finds it impossible to understand what is said concerning them
when his mind cannot embrace the ambiguity of these doctrines, he
imagines those who speak to him are better acquainted with the
objects of their discourse than himself; these seizing the favourable
opportunity, do not let it slip, they reiterate to him with Stentorian
lungs, "That the most certain way is to agree with what they tell him;
to allow himself to be guided by them;" in short, they persuade him to
shut his eyes, that he may with greater perspicuity distinguish the
road he is to travel: once arrived at this influence, they indelibly fix
their lessons; irrevocably chain him to the oar; by holding up to his
view the punishments intended for him by these imaginary beings, in case
he refuses to accredit, in the most liberal manner, their marvellous
inventions; this argument, although it only supposes the thing in
question, serves to close his mouth--to put an end to his research;
alarmed, confused, bewildered, he seems convinced by this victorious
reasoning--attaches to it a sacredness that fills him with awe--blindly
conceives that they have much clearer ideas of the subject than
himself--fears to perceive the palpable contradictions of the doctrines
announced to him, until, perhaps, some being, more subtle than those who
have enslaved him, by labouring the point incessantly, attacking him on
the weak side of his interest, arrives at throwing the absurdity of his
system into light, and finally succeeds by inducing him to adopt that
of another set of speculators. The uninformed man generally believes
his priests have more senses than himself; he takes them for superior
beings; for divine men. He only sees that which these priests inform
him he must contemplate; to every thing else his eyes are completely
hoodwinked; thus the authority of the priests frequently decides,
without appeal, that which is useful perhaps only to the priesthood.

When we shall be disposed to recur to the origin of things, we shall
ever find that it has been man's imagination, guided by his ignorance,
under the influence of fear, which gave birth to his gods; that
enthusiasm or imposture have generally either embellished or disfigured
them; that credulity readily adopted the fabulous accounts which
interested duplicity promulgated respecting them; that these
dispositions, sanctioned by time, became habitual. Tyrants finding their
advantage in sustaining them, have usually established their power upon
the blindness of mankind, and the superstitious fears with which it is
always accompanied. Thus, under whatever point of view it is considered,
it will always be found that _error cannot be useful to the human
species._

Nevertheless, the happy enthusiast, when his soul is sensible of its
enjoyments, when his softened imagination has occasion to paint to
itself a seducing object, to which he can render thanks for the kindness
he experiences, will ask, "Wherefore deprive me of a being that I see
under the character of a sovereign, filled with wisdom, abounding in
goodness? What comfort do I not find in figuring to myself a powerful,
intelligent, indulgent monarch, of whom I am the favorite; who
continually occupies himself with my welfare--unceasingly watches over
my safety--who perpetually administers to my wants--who always consents
that under him I shall command the whole of nature? I believe I behold
him constantly showering his benefits on man; I see his Providence
labouring for his advantage without relaxation; he covers the earth
with verdure to delight him; he loads the trees with delicious fruits
to gratify his palate; he fills the forests with animals suitable to his
nourishment; he suspends over his head planets with innumerable stars,
to enlighten him by day, to guide his erring steps by night; he extends
around him the azure firmament to gladden his sight; he decorates the
meadows with flowers to please his fancy; he causes crystal fountains to
flow with limpid streams to slake his thirst; he makes rivulets meander
through his lands to fructify the earth; he washes his residence with
noble rivers, that yield him fish in abundance. Ah! suffer me to thank
thee, Author of so many benefits: do not deprive me of my charming
sensations. I shall not find my illusions so sweet, so consolatory in a
severe destiny--in a rigid necessity--in a blind inanimate matter--in a
nature destitute of intelligence, devoid of feeling."

"Wherefore," will say the unfortunate, from whom his destiny has
rigorously withheld those benefits which have been lavished on so many
others; "wherefore ravish from me an error that is dear to me? Wherefore
annihilate to me a being, whose consoling idea dries up the source of my
tears--who serves to calm my sorrows? Wherefore deprive me of an object
which I represent to myself as a compassionate, tender father; who
reproves me in this world, but into whose arms I throw myself with
confidence, when the whole of nature appears to have abandoned me?
Supposing it no more than a chimera, the unhappy have occasion for it,
to guarantee them against frightful despair: is it not cruel, is it not
inhuman, to be desirous of plunging them into a vacuum, by seeking to
undeceive them? Is it not an useful error, preferable to those truths
which deprive the mind of every consolation, which do not hold forth any
relief from its sorrows?"

Thus will equally reason the Negro, the Mussulman, the Brachman, and
others. We shall reply to these enthusiasts, no! truth can never render
you unhappy; it is this which really consoles us; it is a concealed
treasure, much superior to all the superstitions ever invented by fear;
it can cheer the heart; give it courage to support the burthens of
life; make us smile under adversity; elevate the soul; render it
active; furnishes it with means to resist the attacks of fate; to combat
misfortunes with success. This will shew clearly that the good and evil
of life are distributed with an equal hand, without respect to man's
peculiar comforts; that all beings are equally regarded in the universe;
that every thing is submitted to necessary laws; that man has no right
whatever to think himself a being peculiarly favoured--who is exempted
from the common operations of the eternal routine; that it is folly to
think he is the only being considered--one for whose enjoyment alone
every thing is produced; an attention to facts will suffice to put an
end to this delusion, however pleasant may be the indulgence of such
a notion; the most superficial glance of the eye will be sufficient
to undeceive us in the idea, that he is the _final cause_ of the
creation--the constant object of the labours of nature, or of its
Author. Let us seriously ask him, if he does not witness good constantly
blended with evil? If he does not equally partake of them with the other
beings in nature? To be obstinately bent to see only the evil, is as
irrational as to be willing only to notice the good. Providence seems to
be just as much occupied for one class of beings as for another. We see
the calm succeed the storm; sickness give place to health; the blessings
of peace follow the calamities of war; the earth in every country
bring forth roots necessary for the nourishment of man, produce others
suitable to his destruction. Each individual of the human species is
a compound of good and bad qualities; all nations present a varied
spectacle of virtues, growing up beside vices; that which gladdens one
being, plunges another into sadness--no event takes place that does not
give birth to advantages for some, to disadvantages for others. Insects
find a safe retreat in the ruin of the palace, which crushes man in
its fall; man by his death furnishes food for myriads of contemptible
insects; animals are destroyed by thousands that he may increase his
bulk; linger out for a season a feverish existence. We see beings
engaged in perpetual hostility, each living at his neighbour's expence;
the one banquetting upon that which causes the desolation of the other;
some luxuriously growing into flesh upon the misery which wears others
into skeletons--profiting by misfortunes, rioting upon disasters, which
ultimately, reciprocally destroy them. The most deadly poisons spring up
beside the most wholesome fruits the earth equally nourishes the fatal
steel which terminates man's career, and the fruitful corn that prolongs
his existence; the bane and its antidote are near neighbours, repose on
the same bosom, ripen under the same sun, equally court the hand of the
incautious stranger. The rivers which man believes flow for no other
purpose than to irrigate his residence, sometimes swell their waters,
overtop their banks, inundate his fields, overturn his dwelling, and
sweep away the flock and shepherd. The ocean, which he vainly imagines
was only collected together to facilitate his commerce supply him with
fish, and wash his shores; often wrecks his ships, frequently bursts its
boundaries, lays waste his lands, destroys the produce of his industry,
and commits the most frightful ravages. The halcyon, delighted with the
tempest, voluntarily mingles with the storm; rides contentedly upon the
surge; rejoiced by the fearful howlings of the northern blast, plays
with happy buoyancy upon the foaming billows, that have ruthlessly
dashed in pieces the vessel of the unfortunate mariner; who, plunged
into an abyss of misery, with tremulous emotion clings to the wreck;
views with horrific despair, the premature destruction of his indulged
hopes; sighs deeply at the thoughts of home; with aching heart, thinks
of the cherished friends his streaming eyes will never more behold in an
agony of soul dwells upon the faithful affection of an adored wife, who
will never again repose her drooping head upon his manly bosom; grows
wild with the appalling remembrance of beloved children, his wearied
arms will never more encircle with parental fondness; then sinks for
ever, the unhappy victim of circumstances that fill with glee the
fluttering bird, who sees him yield to the overwhelming force of the
infuriate waves. The conqueror displays his military skill, fights a
sanguinary battle, puts his enemy to the rout, lays waste his country,
slaughters thousands of his fellows, plunges whole districts into tears,
fills the land with the moans of the fatherless, the wailings of the
widow, in order that the crows may have a banquet--that ferocious beasts
may gluttonously gorge themselves with human gore--that worms may riot
in luxury.

Thus when there is a question concerning an agent we see act so
variously; whose motives seem sometimes to be advantageous, sometimes
disadvantageous for the human race; at least each individual will judge
after the peculiar mode in which he is himself affected; there will
consequently be no fixed point, no general standard in the opinions
men will form to themselves. Indeed our mode of judging will always
be governed by our manner of seeing, by our way of feeling. This
will depend upon our temperament, which itself springs out of our
organization, and the peculiarity of the circumstances in which we are
placed; these can never be the same for all the beings of our species.
These individual modes of being affected, then, will always furnish the
colours of the portrait which man may paint to himself of the Divinity;
it must therefore be obvious they can never be determinate--can have
no fixity--can never be reduced to any graduated scale; the inductions
which they may draw from them, can never be either constant or uniform;
each will always judge after himself, will never see any thing but
himself or his own peculiar situation in the picture he delineates.

This granted, the man who has a contented, sensible soul, with a lively
imagination, will paint the Divinity under the most charming traits; he
will believe that he sees in the whole of nature nothing but proofs of
benevolence, evidence of goodness, because it will unceasingly cause him
agreeable sensations. In his poetical extacy he will imagine he every
where perceives the impression of a perfect intelligence--of an infinite
wisdom--of a providence tenderly occupied with the welfare of man;
self-love joining itself to these exalted qualities, will put the
finishing hand to his persuasion, that the universe is made solely for
the human race; he will strive in imagination to kiss with transport the
hand from which he believes he receives so many benefits; touched with
his kindness, gratified with the perfume of roses whose thorns he does
not perceive, or which his extatic delirium prevents him from feeling,
he will think he can never sufficiently acknowledge the necessary
effects, which he will look upon as indubitable testimony of the divine
predilection for man. Completely inebriated with these feelings, this
enthusiast will not behold those sorrows, will not notice that confusion
of which the universe is the theatre: or if it so happens, he cannot
prevent himself from being a witness, he will be persuaded that in the
views of an indulgent providence, these calamities are necessary to
conduct man to a higher state of felicity; the reliance which he has in
the Divinity, upon whom he imagines they depend, induces him to believe,
that man only suffers for his good; that this being, who is fruitful in
resources, will know how to make him reap advantage from the evils which
he experiences in this world: his mind thus pre-occupied, from thence
sees nothing that does not elicit his admiration call forth his
gratitude; excite his confidence; even those effects which are the most
natural, the most necessary, appear in his eyes miracles of benevolence;
prodigies of goodness: he shuts his eyes to the disorders which could
bring these amiable qualities into question: the most cruel calamities,
the most afflicting events, the most heart-rending circumstances, cease
to be disorders in his eyes, and do nothing, more than furnish him with
new proofs of the divine perfections; he persuades himself that what
appears defective or imperfect, is only so in appearance; he admires the
wisdom, acknowledges the bounty of the Divinity, even in those effects
which are the most terrible for his race--most suitable to discourage
his species--most fraught with misery for his fellow.

It is, without doubt, to this happy disposition of the human mind,
in some beings of his order, that is to be ascribed the system of
_Optimism_, by which enthusiasts, furnished with a romantic imagination,
seem to have renounced the evidence of their senses: to find that even
for man every thing is good in nature, where the good has constantly its
concomitant evil, and where minds less prejudiced, less poetical, would
judge that every thing is only that which it can be--that the good
and the evil are equally necessary--that they have their source in
the nature of things; moreover, in order to attribute any particular
character to the events that take place, it would be needful to know the
aim of the whole: now the whole cannot have an aim, because if it had a
tendency, an aim, or end, it would no longer be the whole, seeing that
that to which it tended would be a part not included.

It will be asserted by some, that the evils which we behold in this
world are only relative, merely apparent; that they prove nothing
against the good: but does not man almost uniformly judge after his own
mode of feeling; after his manner of co-existing with those causes
by which he is encompassed; which constitute the order of nature with
relation to himself; consequently, he ascribes wisdom and goodness to
all that which affects him pleasantly, disorder to that state of things
by which he is injured. Nevertheless every thing which we witness in
the world conspires to prove to us, that whatever is, is necessary; that
nothing is done by chance; that all the events, good or bad, whether
for us or for beings of a different order, are brought about by causes
acting after certain and determinate laws; that nothing can he
a sufficient warrantry in us to clothe with any one of our human
qualities, either nature or the motive-power which has been given to
her.

With respect to those who pretend that supreme wisdom will know how
to draw the greatest benefits for us, even out of the bosom of those
calamities which it is permitted we shall experience in this world; we
shall ask them, if they are themselves the confidents of the Divinity;
or upon what they found these assertions so flattering to their hopes?
They will, without doubt, tell us they judge by analogy; that from the
actual proofs of goodness and wisdom, they have a just right to conclude
in favour of future bounty. Would it not be a fair reply to ask, If they
reason by analogy, and man has not been rendered completely happy in
this world, what analogy informs them he will be so in another? If,
according to their own shewing, man is sometimes made the victim of evil
in his present existence, in order that he may attain a greater good,
does not analogical reasoning, which they say they adopt, clearly
warrant a deduction, that the same afflictions, for the same purposes,
will be equally proper, equally requisite in the world to come?

Thus this language founds itself upon ruinous hypotheses, which have
for their bases only a prejudiced imagination. It, in fact, signifies
nothing more than that man once persuaded, without any evidence, of his
future happiness, will not believe it possible he can be permitted to be
unhappy: but might it not be inquired what testimony does he find, what
substantive knowledge has he obtained of the peculiar good that results
to the human species from those sterilities, from those famines, from
those contagions, from those sanguinary conflicts, which cause so many
millions of men to perish; which unceasingly depopulate the earth,
and desolate the world we inhabit? Is there any one who has sufficient
compass of comprehension to ascertain the advantages that result from
the evils that besiege us on all sides? Do we not daily witness beings
consecrated to misfortune, from the moment they quitted the womb of the
parent who brought them into existence, until that which re-committed
them to the earth, to sleep in peace with their fathers; who with great
difficulty found time to respire; lived the constant sport of fortune;
overwhelmed with affliction, immersed in grief, enduring the most cruel
reverses? Who is to measure the precise quantity of misery required to
derive a certain portion of good? Who is to say when the measure of evil
will be full which it is necessary to suffer?

The most enthusiastic Optimists, the _Theists_ themselves, the partizans
of _Natural Religion_, as well as the most credulous and superstitious,
are obliged to recur to the system of another life, to remedy the evils
man is decreed to suffer in the present; but have they really any just
foundation to suppose the next world will afford him a happiness
denied him in this? If it is necessary to recur to a doctrine so little
probable as that of a future existence, by what chain of reasoning do
they establish their opinion, that when he shall no longer have organs,
by the aid of which he is at present alone enabled either to enjoy or
to suffer, he shall be able to compensate the evils he has endured; to
enjoy a felicity, to partake of a pleasure this organic structure has
refused him while on his pilgrimage through the land of his fathers.

From this it will be seen, that the proofs of a sovereign intelligence,
or of a magnified human quality drawn from the order, from the harmony,
from the beauty of the universe, are never more than those which are
derived from men who are organized and modified after a certain mode;
or whose cheerful imagination is so constructed as to give birth to
agreeable chimeras which they embellish according to their fancy: these
illusions, however, must be frequently dissipated even in themselves,
whenever their machine becomes deranged; when sorrows assail them, when
misfortune corrodes their mind; the spectacle of nature, which under
certain circumstances has appeared to them so delightful, so seducing,
must then give place to disorder, must yield to confusion. A man
of melancholy temperament, soured by misfortunes, made irritable
by infirmities, cannot view nature and her author under the same
perspective, as the healthy man of a sprightly humour, who is contented
with every thing. Deprived of happiness, the fretful man can only find
disorder, can see nothing but deformity, can find nothing but subjects
to afflict himself with; he only contemplates the universe as the
theatre of malice, as the stage for tyrants to execute their vengeance;
he grows superstitious, he gives way to credulity, and not unfrequently
becomes cruel, in order to serve a master whom he believes he has
offended.

In consequence of these ideas, which have their growth in an unhappy
temperament, which originate in a peevish humour, which are the
offspring of a disturbed imagination, the superstitious are constantly
infected with terror, are the slaves to mistrust, the creatures of
discontent, continually in a state of fearful alarm. Nature cannot have
charms for them; her countless beauties pass by unheeded; they do
not participate in her cheerful scenes; they look upon this world, so
marvellous to the happy man, so good to the contented enthusiast, as a
_valley of tears_, in which a vindictive fate has placed them only to
expiate crimes committed either by themselves or by their fathers; they
consider themselves as sent here for no other purpose than to be the
sharers of calamity; the sport of a capricious fortune; that they are
the children of sorrow, destined to undergo the severest trials, to the
end that they may everlastingly arrive at a new existence, in which they
shall be either happy or miserable, according to their conduct towards
the ministers of a being who holds their destiny in his hands. These
dismal notions have been the source of all the irrational systems
that have ever prevailed; they have given birth to the most revolting
practices, currency to the most absurd customs. History abounds with
details of the most atrocious cruelties, under the imposing name of
public worship; nothing has been considered either too fantastical or
too flagitious by the votaries of superstition. Parents have immolated
their children; lovers have sacrificed the objects of their affection;
friends have destroyed each other: the most bloody disputes have been
fomented; the most interminable animosities have been engendered, to
gratify the whim of implacable priests, who by crafty inventions have
obtained an influence over the people; to please blind zealots, who have
never been able either to give fixity to their ideas, or to define
their own feelings. Idle dreamers nourished with bile, intoxicated
with theologic fury--atrabilarians, whose melancholic humour frequently
disposes them to wickedness--visionaries, whose devious imaginations,
heated with intemperate zeal, generally leads them to the extremes of
fanaticism, working upon ignorance, whose usual bias is credulity,
have incessantly disturbed the harmony of mankind, kindled the
inextinguishable flame of discord, and in an almost uninterrupted
succession, strewed the earth with the mangled carcasses of the
multitudinous victims to mad-brained error, whose only crime has been
their incapacity to dream according to the rules prescribed by these
infuriate maniacs; although these have never been uniform--never
assimilated in any two countries--never borne the same features in
any two ages, nor even had the united concurrence of the persecuting
contemporaries.

It is then in the diversity of temperament, arising from variety of
organization--in the contrariety of passions, springing out of this
miscellany, modified by the most opposite circumstances, that must
be sought the difference we find in the opinions of the theist,
the optimist, the happy enthusiast, the zealot, the devotee, the
superstitious of all denominations; they are all equally irrational--the
dupes of their imagination--the blind children of error. What one
contemplates under a favorable point of view, the other never looks
upon but on the dark side; that which is the object of the most sedulous
research to one set, is that which the others most seek to avoid: each
insists he is right; no one offers the least shadow of substantive proof
of what he asserts; each points out the great importance of his mission,
yet cannot even agree with his colleagues in the embassy, either upon
the nature of their instructions, or the means to be adopted. It is thus
whenever man sets forth a false supposition, all the reasonings he makes
on it are only a long tissue of errors, which entail on him an endless
series of misfortunes; every time he renounces the evidence of
his senses, it is impossible to calculate the bounds at which his
imagination will stop; when he once quits the road of experience, when
he travels out of nature, when he loses sight of his reason, to strike
into the labyrinths of conjecture, it is difficult to ascertain where
his folly will lead him--into what mischievous swamps this _ignis
fatuus_ of the mind may beguile his wandering steps. It is certainly
true, the ideas of the happy enthusiast will be less dangerous to
himself, less baneful to others, than those of the atrabilarious
fanatic, whose temperament may render him both cowardly and cruel;
nevertheless the opinions of the one and of the other will not be less
chimerical; the only difference will be, that of the first will produce
agreeable, cheerful dreams; while that of the second will present
the most appalling visions, terrific spectres, the fruit of a peevish
transport of the brain: there will, however, never be more than a step
between them all; the smallest revolution in the machine, a slight
infirmity, an unforeseen affliction, suffices to change the course
of the humours--to vitiate the temperament--to endanger the
organization--to overturn the whole system of opinions of the happiest.
As soon as the portrait is found disfigured, the beautiful order
of things is overthrown relatively to himself; melancholy grapples
him--pusillanimity benumbs his faculties--by degrees plunges, him into
the rankest depths of gloomy superstition; he then degenerates into all
those irregularities which are the dismal harvest of fanatic ignorance
ploughed with credulity.

Those ideas, which have no archetype but in the imagination of man,
must necessarily take their complexion from his own character; must be
clothed with his own passions; must constantly follow the revolutions of
his machine; be lively or gloomy; favourable or prejudicial; friendly
or inimical; sociable or savage; humane or cruel; according as he whose
brain they inhabit shall himself be disposed; in fact, they can never be
more than the shadow of the substance he himself interposes between the
light and the ground on which they are thrown. A mortal plunged from a
state of happiness into misery, whose health merges into sickness, whose
joy is changed into affliction, cannot in these vicissitudes preserve
the same ideas; these naturally depend every instant upon the
variations, which physical sensations oblige his organs to undergo.
It will not therefore appear strange that these opinions should be
fluctuating, when they depend upon the state of the nervous fluid, upon
the greater or less portion of igneous matter floating in the sanguinary
vessels.

_Theism_, or what is called _Natural Religion_, cannot have certain
principles; those who profess it must necessarily be subject to vary in
their opinions--to fluctuate in their conduct, which flows out of
them. A system founded upon wisdom and intelligence, which can never
contradict itself, when circumstances change will presently be converted
into fanaticism; rapidly degenerate into superstition; such a system,
successively meditated by enthusiasts of very distinct characters,
must of necessity experience vicissitudes, and quickly depart from its
primitive simplicity. The greater part of those philosophers who have
been disposed to substitute theism for superstition, have not felt
that it was formed to corrupt itself--to degenerate. Striking examples,
however, prove this fatal truth. Theism is almost every where corrupted;
it has by degrees given way to those superstitions, to those extravagant
sects, to those prejudicial opinions with which the human species is
degraded. As soon as man consents to acknowledge invisible powers out
of nature, upon which his restless mind will never be able invariably to
fix his ideas--which his imagination alone will be capable of painting
to him; whenever he shall not dare to consult his reason relatively to
those powers, it must necessarily be, that the first false step leads
him astray, that his conduct as well as his opinions becomes in the long
run perfectly absurd.

Those are usually called Theists, who, undeceived upon the greater
number of grosser errors to which the uninformed, the superstitiously
ignorant, tend the most determined support, simply hold the notion of
unknown agents endowed with intelligence, wisdom, power and goodness, in
short, full of infinite perfections, whom they distinguish from nature,
but whom they clothe after their own fashion; to whom they ascribe their
own limited views; whom they make act according to their own absurd
passions. The religion of Abraham appears to have originally been a kind
of theism, imagined to reform the superstition of the Chaldeans; Moses
modified it, and gave it the Judaical form. Socrates was a theist, who
lost his life in his attack on polytheism; his disciple Aristocles, or
Plato, as he was afterwards called from his large shoulders, embellished
the theism of his master, with the mystical colours which he borrowed
from the Egyptian and Chaldean priests, which he modified in his own
poetical brain, and preserved a remnant of polytheism. The disciples
of Plato, such as Proclus, Ammonius, Jamblicus. Plotinus, Longinus,
Porphyrus, and others, dressed it up still more fantastically, added a
great deal of superstitious mummery, blended it with magic, and other
unintelligible doctrines. The first doctors of Christianity were
Platonists, who combined the reformed Judaism with the philosophy taught
in Academia. Mahomet, in combating the polytheism of his country, seems
to have been desirous of restoring the primitive theism of Abraham, and
his son Ishmael; yet this has now seventy-two sects. Thus it will be
obvious, that theism has no fixed point, no standard, no common measure
more than other systems: that it runs from one supposition to another,
to find in what manner evil has crept into the world. Indeed it has been
for this purpose, which perhaps after all will never be satisfactorily
explained, that the doctrine of free-agency was introduced; that the
fable of Prometheus and the box of Pandora was imagined; that the
history of the Titanes was invented; notwithstanding, it must be evident
that these things as well as all the other trappings of superstition,
are not more difficult of comprehension than the immaterial substances
of the theists; the mind who can admit that beings devoid of parts,
destitute of organs, without bulk, can move matter, think like man, have
the moral qualities of human nature, need not hesitate to allow that
ceremonies, certain motions of the body, words, rites, temples, statues,
can equally contain secret virtues; has no occasion to withhold its
faith from the concealed powers of magic, theurgy, enchantments, charms,
talismans, &c.; can shew no good reason why it should not accredit
inspirations, dreams, visions, omens, soothsayers, metamorphoses, and
all the host of occult sciences: when things so contradictory to the
dictates of reason, so completely opposed to good sense are freely
admitted, there can no longer be an thing which ought to possess the
right to make credulity revolt; those who give sanction to the one,
may without much hesitation believe whatever else is offered to their
credence. It would be impossible to mark the precise point at which
imagination ought to arrest itself--the exact boundary that should
circumscribe belief--the true dose of folly that may be permitted them;
or the degree of indulgence that can with safety be extended to
those priests who are in the habit of teaching so variously, so
contradictorily, what man ought to think on the subjects they handle
so advantageously to themselves; who when it becomes a question what
remuneration is due from mankind for their unwearied exertions in
his favour, are, in spite of all their other differences, in the most
perfect union; except perhaps when they come to the division of
the spoil: in this, indeed, the apple of discord sometimes takes a
tremendous roll. Thus it will be clear that there can be no substantive
grounds for separating the theists from the most superstitious; that it
becomes impossible to fix the line of demarcation, which divides them
from the most credulous of men; to shew the land-marks by which they
can be discriminated from those who reason with the least conclusive
persuasion. If the theist refuses to follow up the fanatic in every step
of his cullibility, he is at least more inconsequent than the last, who
having admitted upon hearsay an inconsistent, whimsical doctrine, also
adopts upon report the ridiculous, strange means which it furnishes him.
The first sets forth with an absurd supposition, of which he rejects
the necessary consequences; the other admits both the principle and the
conclusion. There are no degrees in fiction any more than in truth. If
we admit the superstition, we are bound to receive every thing which
its ministers promulgate, as emanating from its principle. None of
the reveries of superstition embrace any thing more incredible than
immateriality; these reveries are only corollaries drawn with more
or less subtilty from unintelligible subjects, by those who have an
interest in supporting the system. The inductions which dreamers have
made, by dint of meditating on impenetrable materials, are nothing
more than ingenious conclusions, which have been drawn with wonderful
accuracy, from unknown premises, that are modestly offered to the
sanction of mankind by enthusiasts, who claim an unconditional assent,
because they assure us no one of the human race is in a capacity either
to see, feel, or comprehend the object of their contemplation. Does not
this somewhat remind us of what Rabelais describes as the employment of
Queen Whim's officers, in his fifth book and twenty-second chapter?

Let us then acknowledge, that the man who is this most credulously
superstitious, reasons in a more conclusive manner, or is at least more
consistent in his credulity, than those, who, after having admitted a
certain position of which they have no one idea, stop short all at once,
and refuse to accredit that system of conduct which is the immediate,
the necessary result of a radical and primitive error. As soon as they
subscribe to a principle fatally opposed to reason, by what right do
they dispute its consequences, however absurd they may be found? We
cannot too often repeat, for the happiness of mankind, that the human
mind, let it torture itself as much as it will, when it quits visible
nature leads itself astray; for want of an intelligent guide it wanders
in tracks that bewilder its powers, and is quickly obliged, to return
into that with which it has at least some, acquaintance. If man mistakes
nature and her energies, it is because he does not sufficiently study
her--because he does not submit to the test of experience the phenomena
he beholds; if he will obstinately deprive her of motion, he can
no longer have any ideas of her. Does, he, however, elucidate his
embarrassments, by submitting her action to the agency of a being of
which he makes himself the model? Does he think he forms a god, when
he assembles into one heterogeneous mass, his own discrepant qualities,
magnified until his optics are no longer competent to recognize them,
and then unites to them certain abstract properties of which he cannot
form to himself any one conception? Does he, in fact, do more than
collect together that which becomes, in consequence of its association,
perfectly unintelligible? Yet, strange as it may appear, when he no
longer understands himself--when his mind, lost in its own fictions,
becomes inadequate to decipher the characters he has thus promiscuously
assembled--when he has huddled together a heap of incomprehensible,
abstract qualities, which he is obliged to acknowledge are the mere
creatures of imagination, not within the reach of human intellect,
he firmly persuades himself he has made a most accurate and beautiful
portrait of the Divinity; he ostentatiously displays his picture,
demands the eulogy of the spectator, and quarrels with all those who do
not agree to adulate his creative powers, by adopting the inconceivable
being he holds forth to their worship; in short, to question the
existence of his extravaganza, rouses his most bitter reproaches;
elicits his everlasting scorn; entails on the incredulous his eternal
hatred.

On the other hand, what could we expect from such a being, as they have
supposed him to be? What could we consistently ask of him? How make
an immaterial being, who has neither organs, space, point, or contact,
understand that modification of matter called voice? Admit that this
is the being who moves nature--who establishes her laws--who gives to
beings their various essences--who endows them with their respective
properties; if every thing that takes place is the fruit of his infinite
providence--the proof of his profound wisdom, to what end shall we
address our prayers to him? Shall we solicit him to acknowledge that
the wisdom and providence with which we have clothed him, are in fact
erroneous, by entreating him to alter in our favour his eternal laws?
Shall we give him to understand our wisdom exceeds his own, by asking,
him for our pleasure to change the properties of bodies--to annihilate
his immutable decrees--to trace back the invariable course of things--to
make beings act in opposition to the essences with which he has thought
it right to invest them? Will he at our intercession prevent a body
ponderous and hard by its nature, such as a stone, for example, from
wounding, in its fall a sensitive being such as the human frame? Again,
should we not, in fact, challenge impossibilities, if the discordant
attributes brought into union by the theologians were correct; would
not immutability oppose itself to omnipotence; mercy to the exercise
of rigid justice; omniscience, to the changes that might be required in
foreseen plans? In physics, in consequence of the general research
after a perpetual motion, science has drawn forth the discovery, that
by amalgamating metals of contrary properties, the contractile powers
of one kind, under given circumstances which cause the dilation of the
other, by their opposite tendencies neutralize the actual effects
of each, taken separately, and thus produce an equality in the
oscillations, that, neither possessed individually.

It will perhaps, be insisted, that the infinite science of the Creator
of all things, is acquainted with resources in the beings he has formed,
which are concealed from imbecile mortals; that consequently without
changing any thing, either in the laws of nature, or in the essence
of things, he is competent to produce effects which surpass the
comprehension of our feeble understanding; that these, effects will in
no wise be contrary to that order which he himself has established in
nature. Granted: but then I reply, _first_, that every thing which is
conformable to the nature of things, can neither be called
supernatural nor miraculous: many things are, unquestionably, above
our comprehension; but then all that is operated in the world is
natural--grows out of those immutable laws by which nature is regulated.
In the _second_ place, it will be requisite to observe, that by the
word miracle an effect is designed, of which, for want of understanding
nature, she is believed incapable. In the _third_ place, it is worthy of
remark, that the theologians, almost universally, insist that by miracle
is meant not an extraordinary effort of nature, but an effect directly
opposite to her laws, which nevertheless they equally challenge to
have been prescribed by the Divinity. Buddaeus says, "a miracle is an
operation by which the laws of nature, upon which depend the order
and the preservation of the universe, are suspended." If, however, the
Deity, in those phenomena that most excite our surprise, does nothing
more than give play to springs unknown to mortals, there is, then,
nothing in nature, which, in this sense, may not be looked upon as a
miracle; because the cause by which a stone falls is as unknown to us,
as that which makes our globe turn on its own axis. Thus, to explain
the phenomena of nature by a miracle, is, in other words, to say we are
ignorant of the actuating causes; to attribute them to the Divinity,
is to agree we do not comprehend the resources of nature: it is
little better than accrediting magic. To attribute to a sovereignly
intelligent, immutable, provident, wise being, those miracles by which
he derogates from his own laws, is at one blow to annihilate all these
qualities: it is an inconsistency that would shame a child. It cannot be
supposed that omnipotence has need of miracles to govern the universe,
nor to convince his creatures, whose minds and hearts must be in his
own hands. The last refuge of the theologian, when driven off all other
ground, is the possibility of every thing he asserts, couched in the
dogma, "that nothing is impossible to the Divinity." He makes this
asseveration with a degree of self-complacency, with an air of triumph,
that would almost persuade one he could not be mistaken; most assuredly,
with those who dip no further than the surface, he carries complete
conviction. But we must take leave to examine a little the nature of
this proposition, and we do apprehend that a very slight degree of
consideration will shew that it is untenable. In the _first_ place, as
we have before observed, the possibility of a thing by no means proves
its absolute existence: a thing may be extremely possible, and yet not
be. _Secondly_, if this was once to become an admitted argument, there
would be, in fact, an end of all morality and religion. The Bishop of
Chester, Doctor John Wilkins, says, "would not such men be generally
accounted out of their wits, who could please themselves by entertaining
actual hopes of any thing, merely upon account of the possibility of
it, or torment themselves with actual fears of all such evils as are
possible? Is there any thing imaginable wore wild and extravagant
amongst those in bedlam than this would be?" _Thirdly_, the
impossibility would reasonably appear to be on the other side, so far
from nothing being impossible, every thing that is erroneous would seem
to be actually so; the Divinity could not possibly either love vice,
cherish crime, be pleased with depravity, or commit wrong; this
decidedly turns the argument against them; they must either admit the
most monstrous of all suppositions, or retire from behind the shield
with which they have imagined they rendered themselves invulnerable.

To those who may be inclined to inquire, whether it would not be better
that all things were operated by a good, wise, intelligent Being, than
by a blind nature, in which not one consoling quality is found; by a
fatal necessity always inexorable to human intreaty? It may be replied,
_first_, that our interest does not decide the reality of things, and
that when this should be even wore advantageous than it is pointed out,
it would prove nothing. _Secondly_, that as we are obliged to admit
some things are operated by nature, it is certainly on the side of
probability that she performs the others; especially as her capabilities
are more substantively proved by every age as it advances. _Thirdly_,
that nature duly studied furnishes every thing necessary to render us
as, happy as our essence admits. When, guided by experience, we shall
consult her, with cultivated reason; she will discover to us our
duties, that is to say, the indispensable means to which her eternal and
necessary laws have attached our preservation, our own happiness,
and that of society. It is decidedly in her bosom that we shall find
wherewith to satisfy our physical wants; whatever is out of nature, can
have no existence relatively to ourselves.

Nature, then, is not a step-mother to us; we do not depend upon an
inexorable destiny. Let us therefore endeavour to become more familiar
with her resources; she will procure us a multitude of benefits when we
shall pay her the attention she deserves: when we shall feel disposed
to consult her, she will supply us with the requisites to alleviate both
our physical and moral evils: she only punishes us with rigour, when,
regardless of her admonitions, we plunge into excesses that disgrace us.
Has the voluptuary any reason to complain of the sharp pains inflicted
by the gout, when experience, if he had but attended to its counsels,
has so often warned him, that the grossness of sensual indulgence must
inevitably amass in his machine those humours which give birth to the
agony he so acutely feels? Has the superstitious bigot any cause
for repining at the misery of his uncertain ideas, when an attentive
examination of that nature, he holds of such small account, would have
convinced him that the idols under whom he trembles, are nothing but
personifications of herself, disguised under some other name? It is
evidently by incertitude, discord, blindness, delirium, she chastises
those who refuse to, acknowledge the justice of her claims.

In the mean time, it cannot be denied, that a pure Theism, or what is
called Natural Religion, may not be preferable to superstition, in the
same manner as reform has banished many of the abuses of those countries
who have embraced it; but there is nothing short of an unlimited and
inviolable liberty of thought, that can permanently assure the repose
of the mind. The opinions of men are only dangerous when they are
restrained, or when it is imagined necessary to make others think as
we ourselves think. No opinions, not even those of superstition itself,
would be dangerous, if the superstitious did not think themselves
obliged to enforce their adoption, or had not the power to persecute
those who refused. It is this prejudice, which, for the benefit
of mankind, it is essential to annihilate; and if the thing be not
achievable, then the next object which philosophy may reasonably propose
to itself, will be to make the depositaries of power feel that
they never ought to permit their subjects to commit evil for either
superstitious or religious opinions. In this case, wars would be almost
unheard of amongst men: instead of beholding the melancholy spectacle of
man cutting the throat of his fellow man, because this cannot see
with his eyes, we shall witness him essentially labouring to his own
happiness by promoting that of his neighbour; cultivating the earth
in peace; quietly bringing forth the productions of nature, instead of
puzzling his brain with theological disputes, which can never be of the
smallest advantage, except to the priests. It must be a self-evident
truth, that an argument by men, upon that which is not accessible to
man, _could only have been invented by knaves, who, like the professors
of legerdemain, were determined to riot luxuriously on the ignorance and
credulity of mankind._





CHAP. VIII.

_Examination of the Advantages which result from Man's Notions on
the Divinity.--Of their Influence upon Mortals;--upon Politics;--upon
Science;--upon the Happiness of Nations, and that of Individuals._


The slender foundation of those ideas which men form to themselves of
their gods, must have appeared obvious in what has preceded; the proofs
which have been offered in support of the existence of immaterial
substances, have been examined; the want of harmony that exists in the
opinions upon this subject, which all concur in agreeing to be equally
impossible to be known to the inhabitants of the earth, has been shewn;
the incompatibility of the attributes with which, theology has clothed
incorporeity, has been explained. It has been proved, that the idols
which man sets up for adoration, have usually had their birth, either in
the bosom of misfortune, when ignorance was at a loss to account for the
calamities of the earth upon natural principles, or else have been the
shapeless fruit of melancholy, working upon an alarmed mind, coupled
with enthusiasm and an unbridled imagination. It has been pointed out
how these prejudices, transmitted by tradition from father to son,
grafting themselves upon infant minds, cultivated by education,
nourished by fear, corroborated by habit, have been maintained by
authority; perpetuated by example. In short, every thing must have
distinctly evidenced to us, that the ideas of the gods, so generally
diffused over the earth, has been little more than an universal delusion
of the human race. It remains now to examine if this error has been
useful.

It needs little to prove error can never be advantageous for mankind;
it is ever founded upon his ignorance, which is itself an acknowledged
evil; it springs out of the blindness of his mind to acknowledged
truths, and his want of experience, which it must be admitted are
prejudicial to his interests: the more importance, therefore, he
shall attach to these errors, the more fatal will be the consequences
resulting from their adoption. Bacon, the illustrious sophist, who first
brought philosophy out of the schools, had great reason when he said,
"The worst of all things is deified error." Indeed, the mischiefs
springing from superstition or religious errors, have been, and always
will be, the most terrible in their consequences--the most extensive in
their devastation. The more these errors are respected, the more play
they give to the passions; the more value is attached to them, the
more the mind is disturbed; the more they are insisted upon, the
more irrational they render those, who are seized with the rage for
proselytism; the more they are cherished, the greater influence they
have on the whole conduct of our lives. Indeed, there can he but little
likelihood that he who renounces his reason, in the thing which he
considers as most essential to his happiness, will listen to it on any
other occasion.

The slightest reflection will afford ample proof to this sad truth: in
those fatal notions which man has cherished on this subject, are to be
traced the true sources of all those prejudices, the fountain of all
those sorrows, to which he is the victim. Nevertheless, as we have
elsewhere said, utility ought to be the only standard, the uniform
scale, by which to form a judgment on either the opinions, the
institutions, the systems, or the actions of intelligent beings; it is
according to the measure of happiness which these things procure for us,
that we ought either to cover them with our esteem, or expose them to
our contempt. Whenever they are useless it is our duty to despise them;
as soon as they become pernicious, it is imperative to reject
them; reason imperiously prescribes that our detestation should be
commensurate with the evils which they cause.

Taking these principles for a land-mark, which are founded on our
nature, which must appear incontestible to every reasonable being, with
experience for a beacon, let us coolly examine the effects which these
notions have produced on the earth. We have already, in more than one
part of the work, given a glimpse of the doctrine of that morals, which
having only for object the preservation of man, and his conduct in
society, can have nothing, in common with imaginary systems: it has been
shewn, that the essence of a sensitive, intelligent, rational being,
properly meditated, would discover motives competent to moderate
the fury of his passions--to induce him to resist his vicious
propensities--to make him fly criminal habits--to invite him to render
himself useful to those beings for whom his own necessities have a
continual occasion; thus, to endear himself to his, fellow mortals, to
become respectable in his own esteem. These motives will unquestionably
be admitted to possess more solidity, to embrace greater, potency, to
involve more truth, than those which are borrowed from systems that want
stability; that assume more shapes than there are languages; that are
not tangible to the tact of humanity; that must of necessity present a
different perspective to all who shall view them through the medium of
prejudice. From what has been advanced, it will be felt that education,
which should make man in early life contract good habits, adopt
favorable dispositions, fortified by a respect for public opinion,
invigorated by ideas of decency, strengthened by wholesome laws,
corroborated by the desire of meriting the friendship of others,
stimulated by the fear of losing his own esteem, would be fully adequate
to accustom him to a laudable conduct, amply sufficient to divert
him from even those secret crimes, from which he is obliged to punish
himself by remorse; which costs him the most incessant labour to keep
concealed, by the dread of that shame, which must always follow their
publicity. Experience demonstrates in the clearest manner, that the
success of a first crime disposes him to commit a second; impunity leads
on to the third, this to a lamentable sequel that frequently closes a
wretched career with the most ignominious exhibition; thus the first
delinquency is the commencement of a habit: there is much less distance
from this to the hundredth, than from innocence to criminality: the man,
however, who lends himself to a series of bad actions, under even the
assurance of impunity, is most woefully deceived, because he cannot
avoid castigating himself: moreover, he cannot know at what point of
iniquity he shall stop. It has been shewn, that those punishments which
society, for its own preservation, has the right to inflict on those
who disturb its harmony, are more substantive, more efficacious, more
salutary in their effects, than all the distant torments held forth by
the priests; they intervene a more immediate obstacle to the stubborn
propensities of those obdurate wretches, who, insensible to the charms
of virtue, are deaf to the advantages that spring from its practice,
than can be opposed by the denunciations, held forth in an hereafter
existence, which he is at the same moment taught may be avoided by
repentance, that shall only take place when the ability to commit
further wrong has ceased. In short, one would be led to think it obvious
to the slightest reflection, that politics, founded upon the nature of
man, upon the principles of society, armed with equitable laws, vigilant
over morals, faithful in rewarding virtue, constant in visiting crime,
would be more suitable to clothe ethics with respectability, to throw a
sacred mantle over moral goodness, to lend stability to public virtue,
than any authority that can be derived from contested systems, the
conduct of whose professors frequently disgrace the doctrines they lay
down, which after all seldom do more than restrain those whose mildness
of temperament effectually prevents them from running into excess; those
who, already given to justice, require no coercion. On the other hand,
we have endeavoured to prove that nothing can be more absurd, nothing
actually more dangerous, than attributing human qualities to the
Divinity which cannot but choose to find themselves in a perpetual
contradiction.

Plato has said "that virtue consists in resembling God." But how is man
to resemble a being, who, it is acknowledged, is incomprehensible to
mankind--who cannot be conceived by any of those means, by which he is
alone capable of having perceptions? If this being, who is shewn to man
under such various aspects, who is said to owe nothing to his creatures,
is the author of all the good, as well as all the evil that takes
place, how can he be the model for the conduct of the human race
living together in society? At most he can only follow one side of the
character, because among his fellows, he alone is reputed virtuous who
does not deviate in his conduct from justice; who abstains from evil;
who performs with punctuality those duties he owes to his fellows. If it
be taken up, and insisted he is not the author of the evil, only of
the good, I say very well: that is precisely what I wanted to know;
you thereby acknowledge he is not the author of every thing; we are no
longer at issue; you are inconclusive to your own premises, consequently
ought not to demand an implicit reliance on what you choose to assert.

But, replies the subtle theologian, that is not the affair; you must
seek it in the creed I have set forth--in the religion of which I am a
pillar. Very good: Is it then actually in the system of fanatics, that
man should draw up his ideas of virtue? Is it in the doctrines which
these codes hold forth, that he is to seek for a model? Alas! do they
not pourtray their idols: under the most unwholesome colours; do they
not represent them as following their caprice in every thing, who love
or hate, who choose or reject, who approve or condemn according to their
whim, who delight in carnage, who send discord amongst men, who act
irrationally, who commit wantonness, who sport with their feeble
subjects, who lay continual snares for them, who rigorously interdict
the use of their reason? What, let us seriously ask, would become of
morality, if men proposed to themselves such portraits for models!

It was, however, for the most part, systems of this temper that nations
adopted. At was in consequence of these principles that what has been
called religion in most countries, was far removed from being
favourable to morality; on the contrary, it often shook it to its
foundation--frequently left no vestige of its existence. It divided
man, instead of drawing closer the bonds of union; in the place of
that mutual love, that reciprocity of succour, which ought ever to
distinguish human society, it introduced hatred and persecution; it made
them seize every opportunity to cut each other's throat for speculative
opinions, equally irrational; it engendered the most violent
heart-burnings--the most rancorous animosities--the most sovereign
contempt. The slightest difference in their received opinions rendered
them the most mortal enemies; separated their interests for ever; made
them despise each other; and seek every means to render their existence
miserable. For these theological conjectures, nations become opposed to
nations; the sovereign frequently armed himself against his subjects;
subjects waged war with their sovereign; citizens gave activity to the
most sanguinary hostility against each other; parents detested their
offspring; children plunged the pointed steel, the barbed arrow,
into the bosoms of those who gave them existence; husbands and wives
disunited, became the scourges of each other; relations forgetting the
ties of consanguinity, tore each other to pieces, or else reciprocally
consigned them to oblivion; all the bonds of society were rent asunder;
the social compact was broken up; society committed suicide: whilst in
the midst of this fearful wreck--regardless of the horrid shrieks called
forth by this dreadful confusion--unmindful of the havock going forward
on all sides--each pretended that he conformed to the views of his
idol, detailed to him by his priest--fulminated by the oracles. Far
from making himself any reproach, for the misery he spread abroad, each
lauded his own individual conduct; gloried in the crimes he committed in
support of his sacred cause.

The same spirit of maniacal fury pervaded the rites, the ceremonies,
the customs, which the worship, adopted by superstition, placed so much
above all the social virtues. In one country, tender mothers delivered
up their children to moisten with their innocent blood the altars of
their idols; in another, the people assembled, performed the ceremony
of consolation to their deities, for the outrages they committed against
them, and finished by immolating to their anger human victims; in
another, a frantic enthusiast lacerated his body, condemned himself for
life to the most rigorous tortures, to appease the wrath of his gods.
The Jupiter of the Pagans was a lascivious monster; the Moloch of the
Phenicians was a cannibal; the savage idol of the Mexican requires
thousands of mortals to bleed on his shrine, in order to satisfy his
sanguinary appetite.

Such are the models superstition holds out to the imitation of man; is
it then surprising that the name of these despots became the signal for
mad-brained enthusiasm to exercise its outrageous fury; the standard
under which cowardice wreaked its cruelty; the watchword for the
inhumanity of nations to muster their barbarous strength; a sound which
spreads terror wherever its echo could reach; a continual pretext for
the most barefaced breaches of public decorum; for the most shameless
violation of the moral duties? It was the frightful character men gave
of their gods, that banished kindness from their hearts--virtue from
their conduct--felicity from their habitations--reason from their mind:
almost every where it was some idol, who was disturbed by the mode in
which unhappy mortals thought; this armed them with poignards against
each other; made them stifle the cries of nature; rendered them
barbarous to themselves; atrocious to their fellow creatures: in short,
they became irrational, breathed forth vengeance, outraged humanity,
every time that, instigated by the priest, they were inclined to imitate
the gods of their idolatry, to display their zeal, to render themselves
acceptable in their temples.

It is not, then, in such systems, man ought to seek either for models of
virtue, or rules of conduct suitable to live in society. He needs human
morality, founded upon his own nature; built upon invariable experience;
submitted to reason. The ethics of superstition will always he
prejudicial to the earth; cruel masters cannot be well served, but by
those who resemble them: what then becomes of the great advantages which
have been imagined resulted to man, from the notions which have
been unceasingly infused into him of his gods? We see that almost
all nations acknowledge them; yet, to conform themselves
to their views, they trampled under foot the clearest rights of
nature--the most evident duties of humanity; they appeared to act as
if it was only by madness the most incurable--by folly the most
preposterous--by the most flagitious crimes, committed with an unsparing
hand, that they hoped to draw down upon themselves the favor of
heaven--the blessings of the sovereign intelligence they so much boast
of serving with unabated zeal; with the most devotional fervor; with the
most unlimited obedience. As soon, therefore, as the priests give them
to understand their deities command the commission of crime, or whenever
there is a question of their respective creeds, although they are wrapt
in the most impenetrable obscurity, they make it a duty with themselves
to unbridle their rancour--to give loose to the most furious passions;
they mistake the clearest precepts of morality; they credulously
believe the remission of their own sins will be the reward of their
transgressions against their neighbour. Would it not be better to be
an inhabitant of Soldania in Africa, where never yet form of worship
entered, or the name of God resounded, than thus to pollute the land
with superstitious castigation--with the enmity of priests against each
other?

Indeed, it is not generally in those revered mortals, spread over the
earth to announce the oracles of the gods, that will be found the most
sterling virtues. These men, who think themselves so enlightened, who
call themselves the ministers of heaven, frequently preach nothing but
hatred, discord, and fury in its name: the fear of the gods, far from
having a salutary influence over their own morals, far from submitting
them to a wholesome discipline, frequently do nothing more than increase
their avarice, augment their ambition, inflate their pride, extend their
covetousness, render them obstinately stubborn, and harden their hearts.
We may see them unceasingly occupied in giving birth to the most lasting
animosities, by their unintelligible disputes. We see them hostilely
wrestling with the sovereign power, which they contend is subordinate to
their own. We see them arm the chiefs of nations against the legitimate
magistrates; distribute to the credulous multitude the most mortal
weapons, to massacre each other in the prosecution of those futile
controversies, which sacerdotal vanity clothes with the most interesting
importance. Do these men, who advance the beauty of their theories, who
menace the people with eternal vengeance, avail themselves of their own
marvellous notions to moderate their pride--to abate their vanity--to
lessen their cupidity--to restrain their turbulence--to bring their
vindictive humours under control? Are they, even in those countries
where their empire is established upon pillars of brass, fixed on
adamantine rocks, decorated with the most curious efforts of human
ingenuity--where the sacred mantle of public opinion shields them with
impunity--where credulity, planted in the hot-bed of ignorance, strikes
the roots of their authority into the very centre of the earth; are
they, I would ask, the enemies to debauchery, the foes to intemperance,
the haters of those excesses which they insist a severe God interdicts
to his adorers? On the contrary, are they not seen to be emboldened in
crime; intrepid in iniquity; committing the most shameful atrocities;
giving free scope to their irregularities; indulging their hatred;
glutting their vengeance; exercising the most savage cruelties on the
miserable victims to their cowardly suspicion? In short, it may be
safely advanced, without fear of contradiction, that scarcely any
thing is more frequent, than that those men who announce these terrible
creeds--who make men tremble under their yoke--who are unceasingly
haranguing upon the eternity and dreadful nature of their
punishments--who declare themselves the chosen ministers of their
oracular laws--who make all the duties of morality centre in themselves;
are those whom superstition least contributes to render virtuous; are
men who possess the least milk of human kindness; the fewest feelings
of tenderness; who are the most intolerant to their neighbours; the most
indulgent to themselves; the most unsociable in their habits; the most
licentious in their manners; the most unforgiving in their disposition.
In contemplating their conduct, we should be tempted to accredit, that
they were perfectly undeceived with respect to the idols whom they
serve; that no one was less the dupe to those menaces which they so
solemnly pronounce in their name, than themselves. In the hands of the
priests of almost all countries, their divinities resembled the head of
Medusa, which, without injuring him who shewed it, petrified all others.
The priests are generally the most crafty of men, and many among them
are substantively wicked.

Does the idea of these avenging, these remunerating systems, impose upon
some princes of the earth, who found their titles, who rest their power
upon them; who avail themselves of their terrific power to intimidate
their subjects; to make the people, often rendered unhappy by their
caprice, hold them in reverence? Alas! the theological, the supernatural
ideas, adopted by the pride of some sovereigns, have done nothing more
than corrupt politics--than metamorphose, them into an abject tyranny.
The ministers of these idols, always tyrants themselves, or the
cherishers of despots, are unceasingly crying out to monarchs that
they are the images of the Divinity. Do they not inform the credulous
multitude that heaven is willing they should groan under the most cruel
bondage; writhe under the most multifarious injustice; that to suffer
is their inheritance; that their princes have the indubitable right
to appropriate the goods, dispose of the persons, coerce the liberty;
command the lives of their subjects? Do not some of these chiefs of
nations, thus poisoned in the name of deified idols, imagine that every
indulgence of their wayward humour is freely permitted to them? At once
competitors, representatives, and rivals of the celestial powers, do
they not, in some instances, exercise after their example the most
arbitrary despotism? Do they not, in the intoxication into which
sacerdotal flattery has plunged them, think that like their idols, they
are not accountable to man for their actions, that they owe nothing
to the rest of mortals, that they are bound by no bonds but their own
unruly will, to their miserable subjects?

Then it is evident that it is to theological notions, to the loose
flattery of its ministers, that are to be ascribed the despotism,
the tyrannical injustice, the corruption, the licentiousness of some
princes, and the blindness of those people, to whom in heaven's name
they interdict the love of liberty; who are forbid to labour effectually
to their own happiness; to oppose themselves to violence, however
flagrant; to exercise their natural rights, however conducive to their
welfare. These intoxicated rulers, even while adoring their avenging
gods, in the act of bending others to their worship, do not scruple to
outrage them by their irregularities--by their want of moral virtue.
What morality is this, but that of men who offer themselves as living
images, as animated representatives of the Divinity? Are those monarchs,
then, who are habitually unjust, who wrest without remorse the bread
from the hands of a famished people, to administer to the profligacy of
their insatiable courtiers--to pamper the luxury of the vile instruments
of their enormities, atheists? Are, then, those ambitious conquerors,
who not contented with oppressing their own slaves, carry desolation,
spread misery, deal out death among the subjects of others, atheists?
Do we not witness in some of those potentates who rule over nations by
_divine right_, (a patent of power, which every usurper claims as his
own) ambitious mortals, whose exterminating fury nothing can arrest;
with hearts perfectly insensible to the sorrows of mankind; with minds
without energy; with souls without virtue; who neglect their most
evident duties, with which they do not even deign to become acquainted;
powerful men, who insolently set themselves above the rules of equity;
knaves who make a sport of honesty? Generally speaking, is there
the least sincerity in the alliances which these rulers form among
themselves? Do they ever last longer than for the season of their
convenience? Do we find substantive virtues adorn those who most
abjectly submit themselves to all the follies of superstition? Do they
not tax each other as violators of property--as faithlessly aggrandizing
themselves at the expence of their neighbour; in fact, do we not see
them endeavouring to surprise, anxious to over-reach, ready to injure
each other, without being arrested by the menaces of their creeds, or at
all yielding to the calls of humanity? In general, they are too haughty
to be humane; too inflated with ambition to be virtuous; they make a
code for themselves, which they cannot help violating. Charles the Fifth
used to say, "that being a warrior, it was impossible for him to have
either conscience or religion." His general, the Marquis de Piscaire,
observed, that "nothing was more difficult, than to serve at one and the
same time, the god _Mars_ and _Jesus Christ_." Indeed, nothing can be
more opposed to the true spirit of Christianity than the profession
of arms; notwithstanding the Christian princes have the most numerous
armies, and are in perpetual hostility with each other: perhaps the
clergy themselves do not hold forth the most peaceable examples of the
doctrine they teach; they sometimes wrangle for tithes, dispute
for trifling enjoyments, quarrel for worldly opinion, with as much
determined obstinacy, with as, much settled rancour, with as little
charity, as could possibly inhabit the bosom of the most unenlightened
Pagan, whose ignorance they despise--whose superstition they rank as the
grossest effort of idolatrous debasement. It might almost admit of
doubt whether they would be quite pleased to see the mild maxims of the
Evangelists, the true Christian meekness, rigidly followed--whether they
might not think the complete working of their own system would clash
with their own immediate interests? Is it a demonstrable axiom that
the ministers of the Christian faith do not think soldiers are beings
extremely well calculated to give efficacy to their doctrine--solidity
to their advantages--durability to their claims? Be this as it may,
priests as well as monarchs have occasionally waged war for the most
futile interests; impoverished a people from the anti-christian motives;
wrested from each other with all the venom of furies, the bloody remnant
of the nations they have laid waste; in fact, to judge by their conduct
on certain occasions, it might have been a question if they were not
disputing who should have the credit of making the greater number of
miserable beings upon earth. At length, either wearied with their own
fury, exhausted by their own devouring passions, or compelled by the
stern hand of necessity, they have permitted suffering humanity to take
breath; they have allowed the miseries concomitant on war, to cease for
an instant their devastating havoc; they have made peace in the name of
that God, whose decrees, as attested by themselves, they have been so
wantonly outraging,--still ready, however, to violate their most solemn
pledges, when the smallest interest could offer them a pretext.

Thus it will be obvious, in what manner the idea of the Divinity
operates on the priest, as well as upon those who are called his images;
who insist they have no account to render but to him alone. Among these
representatives of the Divine Majesty, it is with difficulty during
thousands of years we find some few who have equity, sensibility,
virtue, or even the most ordinary talent. History points out some
of these vicegerents of the Deity, who in the exacerbation of their
delirious rage, have insisted upon displacing him, by exalting
themselves into gods; and exacting the most obsequious worship; who have
inflicted the most cruel torments on those who have opposed themselves
to their madness, and refused to acknowledge the Divinity of their
persons. These men, whose licentiousness knew no limits, from the
impunity which attended their actions, notwithstanding they had learned
to despise public opinion, to set decency at defiance, to indulge in the
most shameless vice: in spite of the power they possessed; of the homage
they received; of the terror they inspired: although they had learned
to counterfeit, with great effect, the whole catalogue of human virtues;
found it impossible, even with the addition of their enormous wealth,
wrenched from the necessities of laborious honesty, to counterfeit the
animating blush, which modest merit brings forth, when eulogized by some
happy being whose felicity he has occasioned, by following the great
law of nature--which says, "_love thy neighbour as thyself_." On the
contrary, we see them grow listless with satiety; disgusted with their
own inordinate indulgences; obliged to recur to strange pleasures, to
awaken their benumbed faculties; to run headlong into the most costly
follies, in the fruitless attempt to keep up the activity of their
souls, the spring of which they had for ever relaxed, by the profligacy
of their enjoyment.

History, although it describes a multitude of vicious rulers, whose
irregular propensities were of the most mischievous consequence to the
human race, nevertheless, shews us but few who have been atheists. The
annals of nations, on the contrary, offer to our view great numbers of
superstitious princes, governed by their mistresses, led by unworthy
favorites, leagued with priests, who passed their lives plunged in
luxury; indulging the most effeminate pursuits; following the most
childish pleasures; pleased with ostentatious show; slaves even to the
fashion of the vestments that covered them; but strangers to every manly
virtue; insensible to the sorrows of their subjects; although uniformly
good to their hungry courtiers, invariably kind to those cringing
sycophants who surrounded their persons, and poisoned their ears with
the most fulsome flattery: in short, superstitious persecutors, who,
to render themselves acceptable to their priests, to expiate their
own shameful irregularities, added to all their other vices that of
tyrannizing over the mind, of fettering the conscience, of destroying
their subjects for their opinions, when they were in hostility with
their own received doctrines. Indeed, superstition in princes frequently
allied itself with the most horrid crimes; they have almost all
professed religion, although very few of them have had a just knowledge
of morality--have practiced any useful substantive virtue. Superstitious
notions, on the contrary, often serve to render them more blind, to
augment their evil inclinations; to set them at a greater distance from
moral goodness. They for the most part believe themselves assured of the
favor of heaven; they think they faithfully serve their gods, that the
anger of their divinities is appeased, if for a short season they
shew themselves attached to futile customs--lend themselves to absurd
rites--perform some ridiculous duties, which superstition imposes on
them, with a view to obtain their assistance in the prosecution of its
own plans, very rarely in strict unison with their immediate interest.
Nero, the cruel, sanguinary, matricidal Nero, his hands yet reeking with
the blood of that unfortunate being who had borne him in her womb, who
had, with agonizing pains, given the monster to the world that
plunged the dagger in her heart, was desirous to be initiated into the
_Eleusinian Mysteries_. The odious Constantine himself, found in the
priests, accomplices disposed to expiate his crimes. The infamous
Philip, whose ungovernable ambition caused him to be called the daemon
of the south, whilst he assassinated his wife and son, caused the
throats of the wretched Batavians to be cut for their religious
opinions. It is thus, that the priests of superstition sometimes
persuade sovereigns they can atone for crimes, by committing others of a
more atrocious kind--of an increased magnitude.

It would be fair to conclude, from the conduct of so many princes, who
had so much superstition, but so slender a portion of virtue, that the
notion of their gods, far from being useful to them, only served to
render them wore corrupt--to make them more abominable than they already
were; that the idea of an avenging power, placed in the perspective
of futurity, imposed but little restraint on the turbulence of deified
tyrants, who were sufficiently powerful not to fear the reproaches of
their subjects--who had the insensibility to be deaf to the censure of
their fellows--who were gifted with an obduracy of soul, that prevented
their having compassion for the miseries of mankind, from whom they
fancied themselves so pre-eminently distinguished; which, in fact, they
were, if crime can be allowed for the standard of distinction. Neither
heaven nor earth furnishes a balsam of sufficient efficacy to heal the
inveterate wounds of beings cankered to this degree: for such chronic
diseases, there is "no balm in Gilead:" there is no curb sufficiently
coercive to rein in the passions, to which superstition itself
gives activity; which only makes them more unruly; renders them more
inveterately rash. Whenever men flatter themselves with easily expiating
their sins--when they soothe themselves with the consolitary idea of
appeasing the anger of the gods by a show of earnestness, they then
deliver themselves up, with the most unrestrained freedom, to the bent
of their criminal pursuits. The most dissolute men are frequently in
appearance extremely attached to superstition: it furnishes them with a
means of compensating by ceremonies, that of which they are deficient
in morals: it is much easier for them to adopt a faith, to believe in
a doctrine, to conform themselves to certain rituals, than to renounce
their habits, resist their passions, or relinquish the pursuit of that
pleasure, which results to unprincipled minds from the prosecution of
the most diabolical schemes.

Under chiefs, depraved even by superstition, nations continued
necessarily to be corrupted. The great conformed themselves to the
vices of their masters; the example of these distinguished men, whom the
uninformed erroneously believe to be happy, was followed by the people;
courts thus became the sinks from whence issued the epidemic contagion
of licentious indulgence. The law only held forth pictures of honesty;
the dispensers of jurisprudence were partial, partook of the mania of
the times, were labouring under the general disease; Justice suffered
her balance to rust, occasionally removed her bandage, although she
always wore it in the presence of the poor; genuine ideas of equity
had grown into disuse; distinct notions of right and wrong became
troublesome and unfashionable; education was neglected; it served only
to produce prejudiced beings, grounded in ignorance--devotees, always
ready to injure themselves--fanatics, eager to shew their zeal ever
willing to annoy their unfortunate neighbours. Superstition, sustained
by tyranny, ousted every other feeling, hoodwinked its destined victims,
rendered those tractable whom it had the intention to despoil. Whoever
doubts of these truisms, has only to turn over the pages of history,
he will find myriads of evidence to much more than is here stated.
Machiavel, in his _Political Discourses upon Titus Livius_, labours the
point hard, to shew the utility of superstition to the Roman Republic:
unfortunately, however, the examples he brings forward in its support,
incontestibly prove that none but the senate profited by the infatuation
of the people, who availed itself of their blindness more effectually to
bend them to its yoke.

Thus it was that nations, destitute of equitable laws, deficient in the
administration of justice, submitted to irrational government, continued
in slavery by the monarch, chained up in ignorance by the priest, for
want of enlightened institutions, deprived of reasonable education,
became corrupt, superstitious, and flagitious. The nature of man, the
just interests of society, the real advantage of the sovereign, the true
happiness of the people, once mistaken, were completely lost sight
of; the morality of nature, founded upon the essence of man living
in society, was equally unknown; lay buried under an enormous load
of prejudice, that no common efforts were competent to remove. It was
entirely forgotten that man has wants; that society was formed that he
might, with greater security, facilitate the means of satisfying
them; that government, to be legitimate, ought to have for object, the
happiness--for end, the means of maintaining the indivisibility of the
community; that consequently it ought to give activity to springs, full
play to motives suitable to have a favorable influence over sensible
beings. It was quite overlooked, that virtue faithfully rewarded,
vice as regularly visited, had an elastic force, of which the public
authorities could efficaciously avail themselves, to determine their
citizens to blend their interests; to work out their own felicity, by
labouring to the happiness of the body of which they were members. The
social virtues were unknown, the _amor patriae_ became a chimera. Men
thus associated, thus blinded by their superstitious bias, credulously
believed their own immediate interest consisted in injuring each other;
they were solely occupied with meriting the favor of those men, who
fatally accreditted the doctrine of clerical flatterers, of silver-toned
courtiers, which taught that they wore distinctly interested in injuring
the whole.

This is the mode in which the human heart has become perverted; here
is the genuine source of moral evil; the hot-bed of that epidemical
depravity, the cause of that hereditary corruption, the fountain of
that inveterate delinquency, which pervaded the earth; rendering the
abundance of nature nothing better than a curse; blasting the fairest
prospects of humanity; degrading man below the beast of the forest;
sinking his intellectual faculties in the most savage barbarity;
rendering him the vile instrument of lawless ambition; the wretched tool
by which the fetters of his species were firmly rivetted; obliging him
to moisten his harvest with the bitter tears of the most abject slavery.
For the purpose of remedying so many crying evils, grown insupportable,
recourse was had to new superstitions. Notwithstanding this alone had
produced them, it was still imagined, that the menaces of heaven would
restrain passions which every thing conspired to rouse in all hearts;
fatuity persuaded monarchs that ideal, metaphysical barriers, terrible
fables, distant phantoms, would be competent to curb those inordinate
desires, to rein in that impetuous propensity to crime, that rendered
society incommodious to itself; credulity fancied that invisible powers
would be more efficacious, than those visible motives that evidently
invited mortals to the commission of mischief. Every thing was
understood to be achieved, by occupying man's mind with gloomy chimeras,
with vague, undefinable terrors, with avenging angels; and politics
madly believed that its own interests grew out of the blind submission
of its subjects, to the ministers of these delusive doctrines.

What was the result? Nations had only sacerdotal laws; theological
morality; accommodated to the interests of the hierarchy--suitable to
the views of subtle priests: who substituted reveries for realities,
opinions for reason, rank fallacies for sterling truths; who made
ceremonies supply the place of virtue; a pious blindness supersede the
necessity of an enlightened understanding; undermined the sacredness
of oaths, and placed fanaticism on the altars of sociability. By a
necessary consequence of that confidence which the people were compelled
to give to the ministers of superstition, two distinct authorities
were established in each state, who were substantially at variance, in
continual hostility with each other. The priest fought the sovereign
with the formidable weapon of opinion; it generally proved sufficiently
powerful to shake the most established thrones. Thus, although the
hierarchy was unceasingly admonishing the people to submit themselves
to the divine authority of their sovereigns, because it was derived
immediately from heaven, yet, whenever it so happened that the monarch
did not repay their advocacy, by blindly yielding his own authority to
the supervisance of the priests, these made no scruple of threatening
him with loss of his temporalities; fulminated their anathemas,
interdicted his dominions, and sometimes went the length of absolving
his subjects from allegiance. Superstition, in general, only upholds
despotism, that it may with greater certainty direct its blows against
its enemies; it overthrows it whenever it is found to clash with its
interests. The ministers of invisible powers preach up obedience to
visible powers, only when they find these humbly devoted to themselves.
Thus the sovereign was never at rest, but when abjectly cringing to his
priest, he tractably received his lessons--lent himself to his frantic
zeal--and piously enabled him to carry on the furious occupation of
proselytism. These priests, always restless, full of ambition, burning
with intolerance, frequently excited the sovereign to ravage his own
states--encouraged him to tyranny: when, pursuing this sacerdotal mania,
he feared to have outraged humanity, to have incurred the displeasure
of heaven, he was quickly reconciled to himself, upon promise of
undertaking some distant expedition, for the purpose of bringing some
unfortunate nation within the pale of their own particular creed. When
the two rival powers united themselves, morality gained nothing by the
junction; the people were neither more happy, nor more virtuous; their
morals, their welfare, their liberty, were equally overwhelmed by the
combined powers. Thus, superstitious princes always felt interested in
the maintenance of theological opinions, which were rendered flattering
to their vanity, favorable to their power. Like the grateful perfumes
of Arabia, that are used to cover the ill scent of a deadly poison, the
priest lulled them into security by administering to their sensualities;
these, in return, made common cause with him: fully persuaded that the
superstition which they themselves adopted, must be the most wholesome
for their subjects, most conducive to their interests, those who refused
to receive the boon, thus gratuitously forced upon them, were treated
as enemies, held up to public scorn, and rendered the victims of
punishment. The most superstitious sovereign became, either politically
or through piety, the executioner of one part of his slaves; he was
taught to believe it a sacred duty to tyrannize over the mind--to
overwhelm the refractory--to crush the enemy of his priest, under an
idea that he was therefore hostile to his own authority. In cutting the
throats of these unfortunate sceptics, he imagined he at once discharged
his obligations to heaven, and gave security to his own power. He did,
not perceive, that by immolating victims to his priest, he in fact
strengthened the arm of his most formidable foe--the real enemy to
his authority--the rival of his greatness--the least subjected of his
subjects.

But the prevalence of these false notions, with which both the minds of
the sovereign and the people were prepossessed, it was found that every
thing in society concurred to gratify the avidity, to bolster the pride,
to glut the vengeance of the sacerdotal order: every where, it was to be
observed, that the most turbulent, the most dangerous, the most useless
men, were those who were the most amply rewarded. The strange spectacle
presented itself, of beholding those who were born the bitterest enemies
to sovereign power, cherished by its fostering care--honoured at its
hands: the most rebellious subjects were looked upon as the pillars of
the throne; the corrupters of the people were rendered the exclusive
masters of education; the least laborious of the citizens were richly
rewarded for their idleness--munificently remunerated for the most
futile speculations--held in respect for their fatal discord--gorged
with benefits for their inefficacious prayers: they swept off the fat of
the land for their expiations, so destructive to morals, so calculated
to give permanency to crime. Thus, by a strange fatuity, the viper that
could, and frequently did, inflict the most deadly sting on the bosom of
confiding credulity, was pampered and nourished by the unsuspecting hand
of its destined victim.

For thousands of years, nations as well as sovereigns were emulously
despoiling themselves to enrich the expounders of superstition; to
enable them to wallow in abundance: they loaded them with honors,
decorated them with titles, invested them with privileges, granted them
immunities, for no other purpose than to make them bad citizens, unruly
subjects, mischievous beings, who revenged upon society the advantages
they had received. What was the fruit that kings and people gathered
from their imprudent kindness? What was the harvest these men yielded
to their labour? Did princes really become more powerful; were nations
rendered more happy; did they grow more flourishing; did men become more
rational? No! Unquestionably, the sovereign lost the greater portion
of his authority; he was the slave of his priest; and when he wished to
preserve the remnant that was left, or to recover some part of what
had been wrested from him, he was obliged to be continually wrestling
against the men his own indulgence, his own weakness, had furnished
with means, to set his authority at defiance: the riches of society were
lavished to support the idleness, maintain the splendour, satiate the
luxury of the most useless, the most arrogant, the most dangerous of its
members.

Did the morals of the people improve under the pastoral care of these
guides, who were so liberally rewarded? Alas! the superstitious never
knew them, their fanatic creed had usurped the place of every virtue;
its ministers, satisfied with upholding the doctrines, with preserving
the ceremonies so useful to their own interests, only invented
fictitious crimes--multiplied painful penances--instituted absurd
customs; to the end, that they might turn even the transgressions of
their slaves to their own immediate profit. Every where they exercised
a monopoly of expiatory indulgences; they made a lucrative traffic of
pretended pardons from above; they established a tariff, according to
which crime was no longer contraband, but freely admitted upon paying
the customs. Those subjected to the heaviest impost, were always such as
the hierarchy judged most inimical to its own stability; you might at a
very easy rate obtain permission to attack the dignity of the sovereign,
to undermine the temporal power, but it was enormously dear to be
allowed to touch even the hem of the sacerdotal garments. Thus heresy,
sacrilege, &c. were considered crimes of a much deeper dye, that fixed
an indelible stain on the perpetrator, alarmed the mind of the priestly
order, much more seriously than the most inveterate villainy, the
most determined delinquency, which more immediately involved the true
interests of society. Thence the ideas of the people were completely
overturned, imaginary crimes terrified them, while real crimes had
no effect upon their obdurate hearts. A man, whose opinions were at
variance with the received doctrines, whose abstract systems did not
harmonize with those of his priest, was more loathed than a corrupter of
youth; more abhorred than an assassin; more hated than an oppressor; was
held in greater contempt than a robber; was punished with greater
rigor than the seducer of innocence. The acme of all wickedness, was
to despise that which the priest was desirous should be looked upon as
sacred. The celebrated Gordon says, "the most abominable of heresies,
is to believe there is any other god than the clergy." The civil laws
concurred to aid this confusion of ideas; they inflicted the most
serious penalties, punished in the most atrocious manner those unknown
crimes which imagination had magnified into the most flagitious actions;
heretics, infidels, were brought to the stake, and publicly burnt with
the utmost refinement of cruelty; the brain was tortured to find means
of augmenting the sufferings of the unhappy victims to sacerdotal fury;
whilst calumniators of innocence, adulterers, depredators of every
description, knaves of all kinds, were at a trifling cost absolved from
their past iniquity, and opened a new account of future delinquency.

Under such instructors what could become of youth? The period of
juvenility was shamefully sacrificed to superstition. Man, from his
earliest infancy, was poisoned with unintelligible notions; fed with
mysteries; crammed with fables; drenched with doctrines, in which he was
compelled to acquiesce without being able to comprehend. His brain was
disturbed with phantoms, alarmed with chimeras, rendered frantic by
visions. His genius was cramped with puerile pursuits, mechanical
devotions, sacred trifles. Superstition at length so fascinated
the human mind, made such mere automata of mankind, that the people
consented to address their gods in a dialect they did not themselves
understand: women occupied their whole lives in singing Latin,
without comprehending a word of the language; the people assisted very
punctually, without being competent to explain any part of the
worship, under an idea that it was taken kindly they should thus weary
themselves; that it was sufficient to shew their persons in the sacred
temples, which were beautifully decorated to fascinate their senses.
Thus man wasted his most precious moments in absurd customs; spent his
life in idle ceremonies; his bead was crowded with sophisms, his mind
was loaded with errors; intoxicated with fanaticism, he was the declared
enemy to reason; for ever prepossessed against truth, the energy of
his soul was resisted by shackles too ponderous for its elasticity;
the spring gave way, and he sunk into sloth and wretchedness: from this
humiliating state he could never again soar; he could no longer become
useful either to himself or to his associates: the importance he
attached to his imaginary science, or rather the systematic ignorance
which served for its basis, rendered it impossible for the most fertile
soil to produce any thing but thorns; for the best proportioned tree to
yield any thing but crabs.

Does a superstitious, sacerdotal education, form intrepid citizens,
intelligent fathers of families, kind husbands, just masters, faithful
servants, loyal subjects, pacific associates? No! it either makes
peevish enthusiasts or morose devotees, who are incommodious to
themselves, vexatious to others: men without principle, who quickly
pour the waters of Lethe over the terrors with which they have been
disturbed; who know no moral obligation, who respect no virtue. Thus
superstition, elevated above every thing else, held forth the fanatical
dogma, "Better to obey the gods than men;" in consequence, man believed
he must revolt against his prince, detach himself from his wife, detest
his children, estrange himself from his friends, cut the throats of his
fellow-citizens, every time they questioned the veracity of his faith:
in short, a superstitious education, when it had its effect, only served
to corrupt the juvenile heart--to fascinate youthful winds with its
pageantry--to degrade the human soul--to make man mistake the duties
he owed to himself, his obligations to society, his relations with the
beings by whom he was surrounded.

What advantages might not nations have reaped, if they would have
employed on useful objects, those riches, which ignorance has so
shamefully lavished on the expounders of superstition; which fatuity has
bestowed on the most useless ceremonies? What might not have been the
progress of genius, if it had enjoyed those ample remunerations, granted
during so many ages to those priests who at all times opposed its
elevation? What perfection might not science have attained, what height
might not the arts have reached, if they had had the same succours that
were held forth with a prodigal hand to enthusiasm and futility? Upon
what rocks might not morality have been rested, what solid foundations
might not politics have found, with what majestic grandeur might not
truth have illumined the human horizon, if they had experienced the
same fostering cares, the same animating countenance, the same
public sanction, which accompanied imposture--which was showered
upon fanaticism--which shielded falsehood from the rude attack of
investigation--which gave impunity to its ministers?

It is then obvious, that superstitious, theological notions, have not
produced any of those solid advantages that have been held forth; if may
be doubted whether they were not always, and ever will remain, contrary
to healthy politics, opposed to sound morality; they frequently change
sovereigns into restless, jealous, mischievous, divinities; they
transform their subjects into envious, wicked slaves, who by idle
pageantry, by futile ceremonies, by an exterior acquiescence in
unintelligible opinions, imagine themselves amply compensated for
the evil they commit against each other. Those who have never had
the confidence to examine these sublimated opinions; those who feel
persuaded that their duties spring out of these abstruse doctrines;
those who are actually commanded to live in peace, to cherish each
other, to lend mutual assistance, to abstain from evil, and to do good,
presently lose sight of these sterile speculations, as soon as present
interests, ungovernable passions, inveterate habits, or irresistible
whims, hurry them away. Where are we to look for that equity, that union
of interest, that peace, that concord, which these unsettled notions,
supported by superstition, backed with the full force of authority,
promise to the societies placed under their surveillance? Under the
influence of corrupt courts, of time-serving priests, who, either
impostors or fanatics, are never in harmony with each other, are only
to be discerned vicious men, degraded by ignorance--enslaved by
criminal habits--swayed by transient interests--guided by shameful
pleasures--sunk in a vortex of dissipation; who do not even think of
the Divinity. In despite of his theological ideas, the subtle courtier
continues to weave his dark plots, labours to gratify his ambition,
seeks to satisfy his avidity, to indulge his hatred, to wreak his
vengeance, to give full swing to all the passions inherent to the
perversity of his being: maugre that frightful hell, of which the idea
alone makes her tremble, the woman of intrigue persists in her amours;
continues her harlotry, revels in her adulteries. Notwithstanding their
dissipated conduct, their dissolute manners, their entire want of moral
principle, the greater part of those who swarm in courts, who crowd in
cities, would recoil with horror, if the smallest doubt was exhibited of
the truth of that creed which they outrage every moment, of their
lives. What advantage, then, has resulted to the human race from those
opinions, so universal, at the same time so barren? They seem rarely to
have had any other kind of influence than to serve as a pretext for the
most dangerous passions--as a mantle of security for the most criminal
indulgences. Does not the superstitious despot, who would scruple to
omit the least part of the ceremonies of his persuasion, on quitting
the altars at which he has been sacrificing, on leaving the temple where
they have been delivering the oracles and terrifying crime in the name
of heaven, return to his vices, reiterate his injustice, increase his
political crimes, augment his transgressions against society? Issuing
from the sacred fane, their ears still ringing with the doctrines they
have heard, the minister returns to his vexations, the courtier to
his intrigues, the courtezan to her prostitution, the publican to his
extortions, the merchant to his frauds, the trader to his tricks.

Will it be pretended that those cowardly assassins, those dastardly
robbers, those miserable criminals, whom evil institutions, the
negligence of government, the laxity of morals, continually multiply;
from whom the laws, in many instances too sanguinary, frequently wrest
their existence; will it, I say, be pretended that the malefactors who
regularly furnish the gibbets, who daily crowd the scaffolds, are either
incredulous or atheists? No! Unquestionably, these unfortunate beings,
these wretched outcasts, these children of turpitude, firmly believe in
God; his name has been repeated to them from their infancy; they have
been informed of the punishment destined for sinners: they have been
habituated in early life to tremble at his judgments; nevertheless they
have outraged society; their unruly passions, stronger than their fears,
not having been coerced by visible motives, have not, for much more
cogent reasons, been restrained by those which are invisible: distant,
concealed punishments will never be competent to arrest those excesses
which present and assured torments are incapable of preventing.

In short, does not every day's experience furnish us the lesson,
that men, persuaded that an all-seeing Deity views them, hears them,
encompasses them, do not on that account arrest their progress when
the furor exists, either for gratifying their licentious passions, or
committing the most dishonest actions? The same individual who would
fear the inspection of the meanest of his fellows, whom the presence of
another man would prevent from committing a bad action, from delivering
himself up to some scandalous vice, freely sins, cheerfully lends
himself to crime, when he believes no eyes beholds him but those of his
God. What purpose, then, does the conviction of the omniscience, the
ubiquity, the omnipotence of the Divinity answer, if it imposes
much less on the conduct of the human being, than the idea of being
overlooked by the least of his fellow men? He who would not have the
temerity to commit a crime, even in the presence of a child, will make
no scruple of boldly committing it, when he shall have only his God for
a witness. These facts, which are indubitable, ill serve for a reply to
those who insist that the fear of God is more suitable to restrain the
actions of men, than wholesome laws, with strict discipline. When man
believes he has only his God to dread, he commonly permits nothing to
interrupt his course.

Those persons who do not in the least suspect the power of superstitious
notions, who have the most perfect reliance on their efficacy, very
rarely, however, employ them, when they are desirous to influence the
conduct of those who are subordinate to them; when they are disposed
to re-conduct them to the paths of reason. In the advice which a father
gives to his vicious, criminal son, he rather represents to him the
present temporal inconveniencies to which his conduct exposes him, than
the danger he encounters in offending an avenging God; he points out to
him the natural consequences of his irregularities, his health damaged
by debaucheries; the loss of his reputation by criminal pursuits; the
ruin of his fortune by gambling; the punishments of society, &c. Thus
the DEICOLIST himself, on the most important occasions of life, reckons
more stedfastly upon the force of natural motives, than upon those
supernatural inducements furnished by superstition: the same man, who
vilifies the motives that an atheist can have to do good and abstain
from evil, makes use of them himself on this occasion, because he feels
they are the most substantive he can employ.

Almost all men believe in an avenging and remunerating God; yet nearly
in all countries the number of the wicked bears a larger proportion
than that of the good. If the true cause of this general corruption be
traced, it will be more frequently found in the superstitious notions
inculcated by theology, than in those imaginary sources which the
various superstitions have invented to account for human depravity. Man
is always corrupt wherever he is badly governed; wherever superstition
deifies the sovereign, his government becomes unworthy: this perverted
and assured of impunity, necessarily render his people miserable;
misery, when it exceeds the point of endurance, as necessarily renders
them wicked. When the people are submitted to irrational masters, they
are never guided by reason. If they are blinded by priests, who are
either deceived or impostors, their reason become useless. Tyrants, when
combined with priests, have generally been successful in their efforts
to prevent nations from becoming enlightened--from seeking after
truth--from ameliorating their condition--from perfectioning their
morals; and never has the union smiled upon liberty: the people, unable
to resist the mighty torrent produced by the confluence of two such
rivers, have usually sunk into the most abject slavery. It is only by
enlightening the mass of mankind, by demonstrating truth, that we can
promise to render him better; that we can indulge the hope of making him
happy. It is by causing both sovereigns and subjects to feel their true
relations with each other, that their actual interests will be improved;
that their politics will be perfectioned: it will then be felt and
accredited, that the true art of governing mortals, the sure method of
gaining their affections, is not the art of blinding them, of deceiving
them, or of tyrannizing over them. Let us, then, good humouredly consult
reason, avail ourselves of experience, interrogate nature; we shall,
perhaps, find what is requisite to be done, in order to labour
efficaciously to the happiness of the human race. We shall most
assuredly perceive, that error is the true source of the evils
which embitter our existence; that it is in cheering the hearts, in
dissipating those vain phantoms which alarm the ignorant, in laying the
axe to the root of superstition, that we can peaceably seek after truth;
that it is only in the conflagration of this baneful tree, we can ever
expect to light the torch which shall illumine the road to felicity.
Then let man study nature; observe her immutable laws; let him dive into
his own essence; let him cure himself of his prejudices: these means
will conduct him by a gentle declivity to that virtue, without which he
must feel he can never be permanently happy in the world he inhabits.

If man could once cease to fear, from that moment he would be truly
happy. Superstition is a domestic enemy which he always carries within
himself: those who will seriously occupy themselves with this formidable
phantom, must be content to endure continual agonies, to live in
perpetual inquietude: if they will neglect the objects most worthy
of interesting them, to run after chimeras, they will commonly pass
a melancholy existence, in groaning, in praying, in sacrificing,
in expiating faults, either real or imaginary, which they believe
calculated to offend their priests; frequently in their irrational fury
they will torment themselves, they will make it a duty to inflict on
their own persons the most barbarous punishments: but society will reap
no benefit from these mournful opinions--from the tortures of these
pious irrationals; because their mind, completely absorbed by their
gloomy reveries, their time dissipated in the most absurd ceremonies,
will leave them no opportunity of being really advantageous to the
community of which they are members. The most superstitions men are
commonly misanthropists, quite useless to the world, and very injurious
to themselves: if ever they display energy, it is only to devise means
by which they can increase their own affliction; to discover new methods
to torture their mind; to find out the most efficacious means to deprive
themselves of those objects which their nature renders desirable. It is
common in the world to behold penitents, who are intimately persuaded
that by dint of barbarous inflictions on their own persons, by means
of a lingering suicide, they shall merit the favor of heaven. Madmen of
this species are to be seen every where; superstition has in all ages,
in all places, given birth to the most cruel extravagances, to the most
injurious follies.

If, indeed, these irrational devotees only injure themselves, and
deprive society of that assistance which they owe to it, they without
doubt do less mischief than those turbulent, zealous fanatics, who,
infuriated with their superstitious ideas, believe themselves bound to
disturb the world, to commit actual crimes, to sustain the cause of
what they denominate the true faith. It not unfrequently happens that in
outraging morality, the zealous enthusiast supposes he renders himself
agreeable to his God. He makes perfection consist either in tormenting
himself, or in rending asunder, in favour of his fanatical ideas, the
most sacred ties that connect mortals with each other.

Let us, then, acknowledge, that the notions of superstition, are not
more suitable to procure the welfare, to establish the content, to
confirm the peace of individuals, than they are of the society of which
they are members. If some peaceable, honest, inconclusive enthusiasts,
find either comfort or consolation in them, there are millions who, more
conclusive to their principles, are unhappy during their whole life;
who are perpetually assailed by the most melancholy ideas; to whom their
disordered imagination shews these notions, as every instant involving
them in the most cruel punishments. Under such formidable systems, a
tranquil, sociable devotee, is a man who has not reasoned upon them.

In short, every thing serves to prove, that superstitious opinions have
the strongest influence over men; that they torment them unceasingly,
divide them from their dearest connections, inflame their minds, envenom
their passions, render them miserable without ever restraining their
actions, except when their own temperament proves too feeble to propel
them forward: all this holds forth one great lesson, that _superstition
is incompatible with liberty, and can never furnish good citizens_.





CHAP. IX.

_Theological Notions cannot be the Basis of Morality.--Comparison
between Theological Ethics and Natural Morality.--Theology prejudicial
to the human Mind._


Felicity is the great end of human existence; a supposition therefore,
to be actually useful to man, should render him happy. By what parity
of reasoning can he flatter himself that an hypothesis, which does not
facilitate his happiness in his present duration, may one day conduct
him to permanent bliss? If mortals only sigh, tremble, and groan in this
world, of which they have a knowledge, upon what foundation is it they
expect a more felicitous existence hereafter, in a world of which they
know nothing? If man is every where the child of calamity, the victim to
necessary evil, the unhappy sufferer under an immutable system, ought he
reasonably to indulge a greater confidence in future happiness?

On the other hand, a supposition which should throw light on every
thing, which should supply an easy solution to all the questions to
which it could be applied, when even it should not be competent to
demonstrate the certitude, would probably be true: but that system which
should only obscure the clearest notions, render more insoluble the
problems desired to be resolved by its means, would most assuredly
be looked upon as fallacious; as either useless or dangerous. To be
convinced of this principle, let us examine, without prejudice, if the
theological ideas of the Divinity have ever given the solution to any
one difficulty. Has the human understanding progressed a single step
by the assistance of this metaphysical science? Has it not, on the
contrary, had a tendency to obscure the wore certain science of morals?
Has it not, in many instances, rendered the most essential duties of
our nature problematical? Has it not in a great measure confounded the
notions of virtue and vice, of justice and injustice? Indeed, what
is virtue, in the eyes of the generality of theologians? They will
instantly reply, "that which is conformable to the will of the
incomprehensible beings who govern nature." But way it not be asked,
without offence to the individual opinions of any one, what are these
beings, of whom they are unceasingly talking, without having the
capacity to comprehend them? How can we acquire a knowledge of their
will? They will forthwith reply, with a confidence that is meant to
strike conviction on uninformed minds, by recounting what they are not,
without even attempting to inform us what they are. If they do undertake
to furnish an idea of them, they will heap upon their hypothetical
beings a multitude, of contradictory, incompatible attributes, with
which they will form a whole, at once impossible for the human mind to
conceive or else they will refer to oracles, by which they insist their
intentions have been promulgated to mankind. If, however, they are
requested to prove the authenticity of these oracles, which are at such
variance with each other, they will refer to miracles in support of what
they assert: these miracles, independent of the difficulty there must
exist to repose in them our faith, when, as we have seen, they are
admitted even by the theologians themselves, to be contrary to the
intelligence, the immutability, to the omnipotency of their immaterial
substances, are, moreover, warmly disputed by each particular sect,
as being impositions, practised by the others for their own individual
advantage. As a last resource, then, it will be necessary to accredit
the integrity, to rely on the veracity, to rest on the good faith of
the priests, who announce these oracles. On this again, there arises two
almost insuperable difficulties, in the _first_ place, who shall assure
us of their actual mission? are we quite certain none of them may be
mistaken? how shall we be justified in giving credence to their powers?
are they not these priests themselves, who announce to us that they are
the infallible interpreters of a being whom they acknowledge they do
not at all know? In the _second_ place, which set of these oracular
developements are we to adopt? For to give currency to the whole, would,
in point of fact, annihilate them entirely; seeing, that no two of them
run in unison with each other. This granted, the priests, that is to
say, men extremely suspicious, but little in harmony with each other,
will be the arbiters of morality; they will decide (according to their
own uncertain knowledge, after their various passions, in conformity to
the different perspectives under which they view these things,) on the
whole system of ethics; upon which absolutely rests the repose of
the world--the sterling happiness of each individual. Would this be
a desirable state? would it be that from which humanity has the best
founded prospect of that felicity, which is the desired object of his
research? Again; do we not see that either enthusiasm or interest is the
only standard of their decisions? that their morals are as variable as
their caprice? those who listen to them, very rarely discover to what
line they will adhere. In their various writings, we have evidence of
the most bitter animosities; we find continual contradictions; endless
disputes upon what they themselves acknowledge to be the most essential
points; upon those premises, in the substantive proof of which their
whole system depends; the very beings they depict as their source of
their various creeds, are pourtrayed as variable as themselves; as
frequently changing their plans as these are their arguments. What
results from all this to a rational man? It will be natural for him to
conclude, that neither inconstant gods, nor vacillating priests, whose
opinions are more fluctuating than the seasons, can be the proper
models of a moral system, which should be as regular, as determinate,
as invariable as the laws of nature herself; as that eternal march, from
which we never see her derogate.

No! Arbitrary, inconclusive, contradictory notions, abstract,
unintelligible speculations, can never be the sterling bases of the
ethical science! They must be evident, demonstrable principles, deduced
from the nature of man, founded upon his wants, inspired by rational
education, rendered familiar by habit, made sacred by wholesome laws,
that will flash conviction on our mind, render systems useful to
mankind, make virtue dear to us--that will people nations with honest
men--fill up the ranks with faithful subjects--crowd them with
intrepid citizens. Incomprehensible beings can present nothing to our
imagination, save vague ideas, which will never embrace any common point
of union amongst those who shall contemplate them. If these beings are
painted as terrible, the mind is led astray; if changeable, it always
precludes us from ascertaining the road we ought to pursue. The menaces
held forth by those, who, in despite of their own assertions, say they
are acquainted with the views, with the determination of these beings,
will seldom do more than render virtue unpleasant; fear alone will
then make us practise with reluctance, that which reason, which our
own immediate interest, ought to make us execute with pleasure. The
inculcation of terrible ideas will only serve to disturb honest persons,
without in the least arresting the progress of the profligate, or
diverting the course of the flagitious: the greater number of men,
when they shall be disposed to sin, to deliver themselves up to vicious
propensities, will cease to contemplate these terrific ideas, will only
behold a merciful God, who is filled with goodness, who will pardon the
transgressions of their weakness. Man never views things but on that
side which is most conformable to his desires.

The goodness of God cheers the wicked; his rigour disturbs the honest
man. Thus, the qualities with which theology clothes its immaterial
substances, themselves turn out disadvantageous to sound morality. It
is upon this infinite goodness that the most corrupt men will have the
audacity to reckon, when they are either hurried along by crime, or
given up to habitual vice. If, then, they are reminded of their criminal
courses, they reply, "God is good, his mercy is infinite, his clemency
boundless:" thus it may be said that religion itself is pressed into the
service of vice, by the children of turpitude. Superstition, above all,
rather abets crime than represses it, by holding forth to mortals that
by the assistance of certain ceremonies, the performance of certain
rites, the repetition of certain prayers, aided by the payment of
certain sums of money, they can appease the anger of their gods, assuage
the wrath of heaven, wash out the stains of their sins, and be received
with open arms into the happy number of the elect--be placed in
the blissful abodes of eternity. In short, do not the priests of
superstition universally affirm, that they possess infallible secrets,
for reconciling the most perverse to the pale of their respective
systems?

It must be concluded from this, that however these systems are viewed,
in whatever manner they are considered, they cannot serve for the basis
of morality, which in its very nature is formed to be invariably the
same. Irascible systems are only useful to those who find an interest in
terrifying the ignorance of mankind, that they may advantage themselves
of his fears--profit by his expiations. The nobles of the earth, who are
frequently men not gifted with the most exemplary morals--who do not
on all occasions exhibit the most perfect specimens of self-denial--who
would not, perhaps, be at all times held up as mirrors of virtue, will
not see these formidable systems, when they shall be inclined to listen
to their passions; to lend themselves to the indulgence of their unruly
desires: they will, however, feel no repugnance to make use of them
to frighten others, to the end that they may preserve unimpaired their
superiority; that they may keep entire their prerogatives; that they may
more effectually bind them to servitude. Like the rest of mankind, they
will see their God under the traits of his benevolence; they will always
believe him indulgent to those outrages they may commit against their
fellows, provided they shew due respect for him themselves: superstition
will furnish them with easy means to turn aside his Wrath; its ministers
seldom omit a profitable opportunity, to expiate the crimes of human
nature.

Morality is not made to follow the caprices of the imagination, the fury
of the passions, the fluctuating interests of men: it ought to possess
stability; to be at all times the same, for all the individuals of the
human race; it ought neither to vary in one country, nor in one race
from another: neither superstition nor religion, has a privilege to make
its immutability subservient to the changeable laws of their systems.
There is but one method to give ethics this solidity; it has been more
than once pointed out in the course of this work: it is only to be
founded upon the nature of man, bottomed upon his duties, rested upon
the relations subsisting between intelligent beings, who are in love,
with their happiness, who are occupied with their own preservation, who
live together in society that they may With greater facility ascertain
these ends. In short we must take for the basis of morality the
necessity of things.

In weighing these principles, which are self evident, confirmed by
constant experience, approved by reason, drawn from nature herself, we
shall have an undeviating tone of conduct; a sure system of morality,
that will never be in contradiction with itself. Man will have no
occasion to recur to theological speculations to regulate his conduct
in the visible world. We shall then be capacitated to reply to those who
pretend that without them there can be no morality. If we reflect upon
the long tissue of errors, upon the immense chain of wanderings, that
flow from the obscure notions these various systems hold forth--of the
sinister ideas which superstition in all countries inculcates; it would
be much more conformable to truth to say, that all sound ethics, all
morality, either useful to individuals or beneficial to society, is
totally incompatible with systems which never represent their gods
but under the form of absolute monarchs, whose good qualities are
continually eclipsed by dangerous caprices. Consequently, we shall
be obliged to acknowledge, that to establish morality upon a steady
foundation, we must necessarily commence by at least quitting those
chimerical systems upon which the ruinous edifice of supernatural
morality has hitherto been constructed, which during such a number
of ages, has been so uselessly preached up to a great portion of the
inhabitants of the earth.

Whatever may have been the cause that placed man in his present abode,
that gave him the faculties he possesses; whether the human species be
considered as the work of nature, or whether it be supposed that he owes
his existence to an intelligent being, distinguished from nature; the
existence of man, such as he is, is a fact; we behold in him a being who
thinks, who feels, who has intelligence, who loves himself, who tends
to his own conservation, who in every moment of his duration strives
to render his existence agreeable; who, the more easily to satisfy
his wants and to procure himself pleasure, congregates in society with
beings similar to himself; of whom his conduct can either conciliate
the favour, or draw upon him the disaffection. It is, then, upon these
general sentiments, inherent in his nature, which will subsist as long
as his race shall endure, that we ought to found morality; which is only
a science embracing, the duties of men living together in society.

These duties have their spring in our nature, they are founded upon our
necessities, because we cannot reach the goal of happiness, if we do not
employ the requisite means: these means constitute the moral science. To
be permanently felicitous, we must so comport ourselves as to merit the
affection, so act as to secure the assistance of those, beings with whom
we are associated; these will only accord us their love, lend us their
esteem, aid us in our projects, labour to our peculiar happiness, but in
proportion as our own exertions shall be employed for their advantage.
It is this necessity, flowing naturally out of the relations of mankind,
that is called MORAL OBLIGATION. It is founded upon reflection, rested
upon those motives competent to determine sensible, intelligent beings,
to pursue that line of conduct, which in best calculated to achieve that
happiness towards which they are continually verging. These motives
in the human species, never can be other than the desire, always
regenerating, of procuring good and avoiding evil. Pleasure and pain,
the hope of happiness, or the fear of misery, are the only motives
suitable to have an efficacious influence on the volition of sensible
beings. To impel them towards this end, it is sufficient these motives
exist and be understood to have a knowledge of them, it is only
requisite to consider our own constitution: according to this, we shall
find we can only love those actions, approve that conduct, from whence
result actual and reciprocal utility; this constitutes VIRTUE. In
consequence, to conserve ourselves, to make our own happiness, to enjoy
security, we are compelled to follow the routine which conducts to
this end; to interest others in our own preservation, we are obliged
to display an interest in theirs; we must do nothing that can have a
tendency to interrupt that mutual co-operation which alone can lead
to the felicity desired. Such is the true establishment of moral
obligation.

Whenever it is attempted to give any other basis to morality than the
nature of man, we shall always deceive ourselves; none other can have
the least stability; none can be more solid. Some authors, even of great
integrity, have thought, that to give ethics more respectability in the
eyes of man, to render more inviolable those duties which his nature
imposes on him, it was needful to clothe them with the authority of a
being whom they have made superior to nature--whom they have rendered
more powerful than necessity. Theology, seizing on these ideas, with its
own general want of just inference, has in consequence invaded morality;
has endeavoured to connect it with its various systems. By some it has
been imagined, this union would render virtue more sacred; that the fear
attached to invisible powers, who govern nature, would lend more weight,
would give more efficacy to its laws; in short, it has been believed
that man, persuaded, of the necessity of the moral system, seeing it
united with superstition, would contemplate superstition itself as
necessary to his happiness. Indeed it is the supposition that these
systems are essential to morality, that sustains the theological
ideas--that gives permanency to the greater part of all the creeds on
earth; it is erroneously imagined that without them man would neither
understand nor practise the duties he owes to others. This prejudice
once established, gives currency to the opinion that the vague ideas
growing out of these systems are in such a manner connected with
morality, are so linked with the actual welfare of society, that they
cannot be attacked without overturning the social duties that bind man
to his fellow. It is thought that the reciprocity of wants, the desire
of happiness, the evident interests of the community, would be mere
skeleton motives, devoid of all active energy, if they did not borrow
their substance from these various systems; if they were not invested
with the force derived from these numerous creeds; if they were not
clothed with the sanction of those ideas which have been made the
arbiters of all things.

Nothing, however, is more borne out by the evidence of experience,
nothing has more thoroughly impressed itself on the minds of reflecting
men, than the danger always arising from connecting truth with fiction;
the known with the unknown; the delirium of enthusiasm, with the
tranquillity of reason. Indeed what has resulted from the confused
alliance, from the marvellous speculations, which theology has made with
the most substantive realities? of mixing up its evanescent conjectures
with the confirmed aphorisms of time? The imagination bewildered, has
mistaken truth: superstition, by aid of its gratuitous suppositions, has
commanded nature--made reason bow, under its bulky yoke,--submitted man
to its own peculiar caprices; very frequently in the name of its gods
obliged him to stifle his nature, to piously violate the most sacred
duties of morality. When these superstitions have been desirous of
restraining mortals whom they had previously hood-winked, whom they had
rendered irrational, it gave them only ideal curbs, imaginary motives;
it substituted unsubstantial causes, for those which were substantive;
marvellous supernatural powers, for those which were natural, and
well understood; it supplied actual realities, by ideal romances and
visionary fables. By this inversion of principle, morality had no
longer any fixed basis: nature, reason, virtue, demonstration, were laid
prostrate before the most undefinable systems; were made to depend
upon oracular promulgations, which never spake distinctly; indeed, they
generally silenced reason, were often delivered by fanatics, which time
proved to be impostors; by those who, always adopting the appellation
of inspired beings, gave forth nothing but the wanderings of their own
delirium, or else were desirous of profiting by the errors which
they themselves instilled into mankind. Thus these men became
deeply interested in preaching abject submission, non-resistance,
passive-obedience, factitious virtues, frivolous ceremonies; in short,
an arbitrary morality, conformable to their own reigning passions;
frequently prejudicial to the rest of the human race.

It was thus, in making ethics flow from these various systems, they in
point of fact submitted it to the dominant passions of men, who had a
direct interest in moulding it to their own advantage. In being disposed
to found it upon undemonstrated theories, they founded it upon nothing;
in deriving it from imaginary sources, of which each individual forms to
himself his own notion, generally adverse to that of his neighbour;
in resting it upon obscure oracles, always delivered ambiguously,
frequently interpreted by men in the height of delirium, sometimes
by knaves, who had immediate interests to promote, they rendered it
unsteady--devoid of fixed principle,--too frequently left it to the
mercy of the most crafty of mankind. In proposing to man the changeable
creeds of the theologians for a model, they weakened the moral system
of human actions; frequently annihilated that which was furnished by
nature; often substituted in its place nothing but the most perplexing
incertitude; the most ruinous inconsistency. These systems, by the
qualities which are ascribed, to them, become inexplicable enigmas,
which each expounds as best suits himself; which each explains after his
own peculiar mode of thinking; in which the theologian ever finds that
which most harmonizes with his designs; which he can bend to his own
sinister purposes; which he offers as irrefragible evidence of the
rectitude of those actions, which at bottom have nothing but his own
advantage in view. If they exhort the gentle, indulgent, equitable man,
to be good, compassionate, benevolent; they equally excite the furious,
who is destitute of these qualities, to be intolerant, inhuman,
pitiless. The morality of these systems varies in each individual;
differs in one country from another; in fact, those actions which
some men look upon as sacred, which they have learned to consider
meritorious, make others shudder with horror--fill them with the most
painful recollections. Some see the Divinity filled with gentleness and
mercy; others behold him as full of wrath and fury, whose anger is to be
assuaged by the commission of the most shocking cruelties.

The morality of nature is clear, it is evident even to those who outrage
it. It is not thus with superstitious morality; this is as obscure
as the systems which prescribe it; or rather as fluctuating as the
passions, as changeable as the temperaments, of those who expound them;
if it was left to the theologians, ethics ought to be considered as the
science of all others the most problematical, the most unsteady, the
most difficult to bring to a point; it would require the most profound,
penetrating genius, the most active, vigorous mind, to discover the
principles of those duties man owes to himself, that he ought to
exercise towards others; this would render the sources of the moral
system attainable by a very small number of individuals; would
effectually lock them up in the cabinets of the metaphysicians; place
them under the treacherous guardianship of priests: to derive it from
those systems, which are in themselves undefinable, with the foundations
of which no one is actually acquainted, which each contemplates after
his own mode, modifies after his own peculiar ideas, is at once to
submit it to the caprice of every individual; it is completely to
acknowledge, we know not from whence it is derived, nor whence it has
its principles. Whatever may be the agent upon whom they make nature, or
the beings she contains, to depend; with whatever power they way suppose
him invested, it is very certain that man either does, or does not
exist; but as soon as his existence is acknowledged, as soon as it is
admitted to be what it actually is, when he shall be allowed to be a
sensible being living in society, in love with his own felicity, they
cannot without either annihilating him, or new modelling him, cause
him to exist otherwise than he does. Therefore, according to his actual
essence, agreeable to his absolute qualities, conformable to those
modifications which constitute him a being, of the human species,
morality becomes necessary to him, and the desire of conserving himself
will make him prefer virtue to vice, by the same necessity that
he prefers pleasure to pain. If, following up the doctrine of the
theologians, "that man hath occasion for supernatural grace to enable
him to do good," it must be very injurious to sound principles of
morality; because he will always wait for "the call from above," to
exercise that virtue, which is indispensable to his welfare. Tertullian,
nevertheless says expressly, "wherefore will ye trouble yourselves,
seeking after the law of God, whilst ye have that which is common to all
the world, and which is written on the tablets of nature?"

To say, that man cannot possess any moral sentiments without embracing
the discordant systems offered to his acceptance, is, in point of fact,
saying, that he cannot distinguish virtue from vice; it is to pretend
that without these systems, man would not feel the necessity of eating
to live, would not make the least distinction, would be absolutely
without choice in his food: it is to pretend, that unless he is fully
acquainted with the name, character, and qualities of the individual
who prepares a mess for him, he is not competent to discriminate whether
this mess be agreeable or disagreeable, good or bad. He who does not
feel himself satisfied what opinions to adopt, upon the foundation and
moral attributes of these systems, or who even formally denies them,
cannot at least doubt his own existence-his own functions--his own
qualities--his own mode of feeling--his own method of judging; neither
can he doubt the existence of other organized beings similar to himself;
in whom every thing discovers to him qualities analogous with his own;
of whom he can, by certain actions, either gain the love or incur the
hatred--secure the assistance or attract the ill-will--merit the esteem
or elicit the contempt; this knowledge is sufficient to enable him
to distinguish moral good and evil. In short, every man enjoying
a well-ordered organization, possessing the faculty of making true
experience, will only need to contemplate himself in order to discover
what he owes to others: his own nature will enlighten him much more
effectually upon his duties, than those systems in which he will consult
either his own unruly passions, those of some enthusiast, or those of
an impostor. He will allow, that to conserve himself, to secure his own
permanent welfare, he is frequently obliged to resist the blind impulse
of his own desires; that to conciliate the benevolence of others, he
must act in a mode conformable to their advantage; in reasoning thus,
he will find out what virtue actually is; if he puts his theory into
practice, he will be virtuous; he will be rewarded for his conduct by
the harmony of his own machine; by the legitimate esteem of himself,
confirmed by the good opinion of others, whose kindness he will have
secured: if he acts in a contrary mode, the trouble that will ensue, the
disorder of his frame, will quickly warn him that nature, thwarted by
his actions, disapproves his conduct, which is injurious to himself;
to which he will be obliged to add the condemnation of others, who will
hate him. If the wanderings of his mind prevent him from seeing the more
immediate consequences of his irregularities, neither will he perceive
the distant rewards, the remote punishments, which these systems
hold forth; because they will never speak to him so distinctly as his
conscience, which will either reward or punish him on the spot. Theology
has never yet known how to give a true definition of virtue: according
to it, it is an effort of grace, that disposes man to do that which is
agreeable to the Divinity. But what is this grace? How doth it act
upon man? How shall we know what is agreeable to a Divinity who is
incomprehensible to all men?

Every thing that has been advanced evidently proves, that superstitious
morality is an infinite loser when compared with the morality of nature,
with which, indeed, it is found in perpetual contradiction. Nature
invites man to love himself, to preserve his existence, to incessantly
augment the sum of his happiness: superstition teaches him to be in love
only with formidable doctrines, calculated to generate his dislike;
to detest himself; to sacrifice to his idols his most pleasing
sensations--the most legitimate pleasures of his heart. Nature counsels
man to consult reason, to adopt it for his guide; superstition
pourtrays this reason as corrupted, as a treacherous director, that
will infallibly lead him astray. Nature warns him to enlighten his
understanding, to search after truth, to inform himself of his duties;
superstition enjoins him not to examine any thing, to remain in
ignorance, to fear truth; it persuades him there are no relations so
important to his interest, as those which subsist between himself and
systems which he can never understand. Nature tells the being who is
in love with his welfare, to moderate his passions, to resist them when
they are found destructive to himself, to counteract them by substantive
motives collected from experience; superstition desires a sensible being
to have no passions, to be an insensible mass, or else to combat his
propensities by motives borrowed from the imagination, which are as
variable as itself. Nature exhorts man to be sociable, to love his
fellow creatures, to be just, peaceable, indulgent, benevolent, to
permit his associates to freely enjoy their opinions; superstition
admonishes him to fly society, to detach himself from his fellow
mortals, to hate them when their imagination does not procure them
dreams conformable to his own; to break through the most sacred bonds,
to maintain his own opinions, or to frustrate those of his neighbour; to
torment, to persecute, to massacre, those who will not be mad after his
own peculiar manner. Nature exacts that man in society should cherish
glory, labour to render himself estimable, endeavour to establish an
imperishable name, to be active, courageous, industrious; superstition
tells him to be abject, pusillanimous, to live in obscurity, to occupy
himself with ceremonies; it says to him, be useless to thyself, and do
nothing for others. Nature proposes to the citizen, for his model, men
endued with honest, noble, energetic souls, who have usefully served
their fellow citizens; superstition recommends to his imitation mean,
cringing sycophants; extols pious enthusiasts, frantic penitents,
zealous fanatics, who for the most ridiculous opinions have disturbed
the tranquility of empires. Nature urges the husband to be tender, to
attach himself to the company of his mate, to cherish her in his bosom;
superstition makes a crime of his susceptibility, frequently obliges
him to look upon the conjugal bonds as a state of pollution, as the
offspring of imperfection. Nature calls to the father to nurture his
children, to cherish their affection, to make them useful members of
society; superstition advises him to rear them in fear of its systems,
to hoodwink them, to make them superstitious, which renders them
incapable of actually serving society, but extremely well calculated to
disturb its repose. Nature cries out to children to honor their parents,
to listen to their admonitions, to be the support of their old age;
superstition says, prefer the oracles; in support of the systems of
which you are an admitted member, trample father and mother under your
feet. Nature holds out to the philosopher that he should occupy
himself with useful objects, consecrate his cares to his country, make
advantageous discoveries, suitable to perfect the condition of mankind;
superstition saith, occupy thyself with useless reveries; employ thy
time in endless dispute; scatter about with a lavish hand the seeds of
discord, calculated to induce the carnage of thy fellows; obstinately
maintain opinions which thou thyself canst never understand. Nature
points out to the perverse man, that he should blush for his vices, that
he should feel sorrow for his disgraceful propensities, that he should
be ashamed of crime; it shews him, that his most secret irregularities
will necessarily have an influence over his own felicity; superstition
crieth to the most corrupt men, to the most flagitious mortals, "do not
irritate the gods, whom thou knowest not; but if, peradventure, against
their express command, thou dost deliver thyself up to crime, remember
that their mercy is infinite, that their compassion endureth for ever,
that therefore they may be easily appeased; thou hast nothing more to
do than to go into their temples, prostrate thyself before their
altars, humiliate thyself at the feet of their ministers; expiate thy
transgressions by largesses, by sacrifices, by offerings, by ceremonies,
and by prayer; these things done with a willing spirit, and a contrite
heart, will pacify thine own conscience, and cleanse thee in the eyes of
heaven."

The rights of the citizen, or the man in society, are not less injured
by superstition, which is always in contradiction with sound politics.
Nature says distinctly to man, "thou art free; no power on earth can
justly deprive thee of thy rights, without thine own consent; and even
then, thou canst not legitimately make thyself a slave to thy like."
Superstition tells him he is a slave, condemned to groan all his life
under the iron rod of the representatives of its system. Nature commands
man to love the country which gave him birth, to serve it faithfully,
to blend his interests with it, to unite against all those who shall
attempt to injure it; superstition generally orders him to obey without
murmur the tyrants who oppress it, to serve them against its best
interests, to merit their favors by contributing to enslave their fellow
citizens to their ungovernable caprices: notwithstanding these general
orders, if the sovereign be not sufficiently devoted to the priest,
superstition quickly changes its language, it then calls upon subjects
to become rebels; it makes it a duty in them to resist their masters;
it cries out to them, "it is better to obey the gods than men." Nature
acquaints princes that they are men: that it is not by their capricious
whims that they can decide what is just; that it is not their wayward
humours that can mark what is unjust; that the public will maketh the
law. Superstition often insinuates to them that they are gods, to whom
nothing in this world ought to offer resistance; sometimes, indeed, it
transforms them into tyrants, whom enraged heaven is desirous should be
immolated to its wrath.

Superstition corrupts princes; these corrupt the law, which, like
themselves, becomes unjust; from thence institutions are perverted;
education only forms men who are worthless, blinded with prejudice,
smitten with vain objects, enamoured of wealth, devoted to pleasures,
which they must obtain by iniquitous means: thus nature, mistaken, is
disdained; virtue is only a shadow quickly sacrificed to the slightest
interest, while superstition, far from remedying these evils to which
it has given birth, does nothing more than render them still more
inveterate; or else engenders sterile regrets which it presently
effaces: thus, by its operation, man is obliged to yield to the force of
habit, to the general example, to the stream of those propensities, to
those causes of confusion, which conspire to hurry all his species, who
are not willing to renounce their own welfare, on to the commission of
crime.

Here is the mode by which superstition, united with politics, exert
their efforts to pervert, abuse, and poison the heart of man; the
generality of human institutions appear to have only for their object to
abase the human character, to render it more flagitiously wicked. Do
not then let us be at all astonished if morality is almost every where
a barren speculation, from which every one is obliged to deviate in
practice, if he will not risk the rendering himself unhappy. Men can
only have sound morals, when, renouncing his prejudices, he consults
his nature; but the continued impulse which his soul is every moment
receiving, on the part of more powerful motives, quickly compels him
to forget those ethical rules which nature points out to him. He is
continually floating between vice and virtue; we behold him unceasingly
in contradiction with himself; if, sometimes, he justly appreciates the
value of an honest, upright conduct, experience very soon shews him,
that this cannot lead him to any thing, which he has been taught to
desire, on the contrary, that it may be an invincible obstacle to the
happiness which his heart never ceases for an instant to search after.
In corrupt societies it is necessary to become corrupt, in order to
become happy.

Citizens, led astray at the same time both by their spiritual and
temporal guides, neither knew reason nor virtue. The slaves both of
their superstitious systems, and of men like themselves, they had all
the vices attached to slavery; kept in a perpetual state of infancy,
they had neither knowledge nor principles; those who preached virtue to
them, knew nothing of it themselves, and could not undeceive them
with respect to those baubles in which they had learned to make their
happiness consist. In vain they cried out to them to stifle those
passions which every thing conspired to unloose: in vain they made the
thunder of the gods roll to intimidate men whose tumultuous passions
rendered them deaf. It was soon discovered that the gods of the heavens
were much less feared than those of the earth; that the favour of the
latter procured a much more substantive welfare than the promises of
the former; that the riches of this world were more tangible than the
treasures reserved for favorites in the next; that it was much more
advantageous for men to conform themselves to the views of visible
powers than to those of powers who were not within the compass of their
visual faculties.

Thus society, corrupted by its priests, guided by their caprice, could
only bring forth a corrupt offspring. It gave birth to avaricious,
ambitious, jealous, dissolute citizens, who never saw any thing happy
but crime; who beheld meanness rewarded; incapacity honoured; wealth
adored; debauchery held in esteem; who almost every where found talents
discouraged; virtue neglected; truth proscribed; elevation of soul
crushed; justice trodden under foot; moderation languishing in misery;
liberality of mind obligated to groan under the ponderous bulk of
haughty injustice.

In the midst of this disorder, in this confusion of ideas, the precepts
of morality could only be vague declamations, incapable of convincing
any one. What barrier could superstition, with its imaginary motives,
oppose to the general corruption? When it spake reason, it could not be
heard; its gods themselves were not sufficiently powerful to resist the
torrent; its menaces failed of effect, on those hearts which every thing
hurried along to crime; its distant promises could not counterbalance
present advantages; its expiations, always ready to cleanse mortals from
their sins, emboldened them to persevere in their criminal pursuits; its
frivolous ceremonies calmed their consciences; its zeal, its disputes,
its caprices, only multiplied the evils, with which society found itself
afflicted; only gave them an inveteracy that rendered them more
widely mischievous; in short, in the most vitiated nations there was
a multitude of devotees, and but very few honest men. Great and small
listened to the doctrines of superstition, when they appeared favorable
to their dominant passions; when they were desirous to counteract
them, they listened no longer. Whenever superstition was conformable to
morality, it appeared incommodious, it was only followed when it
either combatted ethics or destroyed them. The despot himself found
it marvellous, when it assured him he was a god upon earth; that his
subjects were born to adore him alone, to administer to his phantasms.
He neglected it when it told him to be just; from thence he saw it was
in contradiction with itself, that it was useless to preach equity to
a deified mortal; besides, he was assured the gods would pardon every
thing, as soon as he should consent to recur to his priests, always
ready to reconcile them; the most wicked of their subjects reckoned in
the same manner upon their divine assistance: thus superstition, far
from restraining vice, assured its impunity; its menaces could not
destroy the effects which its unworthy flattery had produced in princes;
these same menaces could not annihilate the hope which its expiations
had furnished to all. Sovereigns, either inflated with pride, or always
confident of washing out their crimes by timely sacrifices, no longer
actually feared their gods; become gods themselves, they believed they
were permitted any thing against poor pitiful mortals, whom they no
longer considered under any other light than as playthings destined for
their earthly amusement.

If the nature of man was consulted in his politics which supernatural
ideas have so woefully depraved, it would completely rectify those false
notions that are entertained equally by sovereigns and by subjects;
it would contribute more amply than all the superstitions existing,
to render society happy, powerful, and flourishing under rational
authority. Nature would teach man, it is for the purpose of enjoying
a greater portion of happiness, that mortals live together in society;
that it is its own preservation, its own immediate felicity, that
society should have for its determinate, unchangeable object: that
without equity, a nation only resembles a congregation of enemies; that
his most cruel foe, is the man who deceives him in order that he may
enslave him; that the scourges most to be feared, are those priests who
corrupt his chiefs, who, in the name of the gods assure them of
impunity for their crimes: she would prove to him that association is a
misfortune under unjust, negligent, destructive governments.

This nature, interrogated by princes, would teach them they are men and
not gods; that their power is only derived from the consent of other
men; that they themselves are citizens, charged by other citizens, with
the care of watching over the safety of the whole; that the law ought
to be only the expression of the public will; that it is never permitted
them to counteract nature, or to thwart the invariable end of society.
This nature would make monarchs feel, that to be truly great, to be
decidedly powerful, they ought to command elevated, virtuous souls; not
minds degraded by despotism, vitiated by superstition. This nature would
teach sovereigns, that in order to be cherished by their subjects, they
ought to afford them succour; to cause them to enjoy those benefits
which their wants render imperative, that they should at all times
maintain them, inviolably, in the possession of their rights, of which
they are the appointed defenders--of which they are the constituted
guardians. This nature would prove to all those princes who should deign
to consult her, that it is only by good actions, by kindness, they can
either merit the love, or secure the attachment of the people; that
oppression does nothing more than raise up enemies against them; that
violence only makes their power unsteady; that force, however
brutally used, cannot confer on them any legitimate right; that beings
essentially in love with happiness, must sooner or later finish by
revolting against an authority that establishes itself by injustice;
that only makes itself felt by the outrage it commits: this is the
manner in which nature, the sovereign of all beings, in whose system all
are equal, would speak to one of these superb monarchs, whom flattery
has deified:--"Untoward, headstrong child! Pigmy, so proud of commanding
pigmies! Have they then assured thee that thou art a god? Have they
flattered thee that thou art something supernatural? Know there is
nothing superior to myself. Contemplate thine own insignificance,
acknowledge thine impotence against the slightest of my blows. I can
break thy sceptre; I can take away thine existence; I can level thy
throne with the dust; I can scatter thy people; I can destroy even the
earth which thou inhabitest; and yet thou hast the folly to believe thou
art a god. Be then, again, thyself; honestly avow that thou art a man,
formed to submit to my laws equally with the meanest of thy subjects.
Learn then, and never let it escape thy memory, that thou art the man of
thy people; the minister of thy nation; the interpreter of its laws;
the executer of its will; the fellow-citizen of those whom thou hast the
right of commanding, only because they consent to obey thee, in view of
that well being which thou promisest to procure for them. Reign, then,
on these conditions; fulfil thy sacred engagements. Be benevolent: above
all, equitable. If thou art willing to have thy power assured to thee,
never abuse it; let it be circumscribed by the immovable limits of
eternal justice. Be the father of thy people, and they will cherish thee
as thy children. But, if unmindful of thy duties, thou neglectest them;
if negligent of thine own interest, thou separatest them from those of
thy great family, if thou refusest to thy subjects that happiness which
thou owest them; if, heedless of thy own security, thou armest thyself
against them; thou shall be like all tyrants, the slave to gloomy care,
the bondman of alarm, the vassal of cruel suspicion: thou wilt become
the victim to thine own folly. Thy people, reduced to despair, shorn of
their felicity, will no longer acknowledge thy divine rights. In vain,
then, thou wouldst sue for aid to that superstition which hath deified
thee; it can avail nothing with thy people, whom sharp misery had
rendered deaf; heaven will abandon thee to the fury of those enemies
to which thy frenzy shall have given birth. Superstitious systems can
effect nothing against my irrevocable decrees, which will that man shall
ever irritate himself against the cause of his sorrows."

In short, every thing would make known to rational princes, that they
have no occasion for superstition to be faithfully obeyed on earth; that
all the powers contained in these systems will not sustain them when
they shall act the tyrant; that their true friends are those who
undeceive the people in their delusions; that their real enemies are
those who intoxicate them with flattery--who harden them in crime--who
make the road to heaven too easy for them--who feed them with fanciful,
chimerical doctrines, calculated to make them swerve from those cares,
to divert them from those sentiments, which they justly owe to their
nations.

It is then, I repeat it, only by re-conducting man to nature, that we
can procure him distinct notions, evident opinions, certain knowledge;
it is only by shewing him his true relations with his fellows, that
we can place him on the road to happiness. The human mind, blinded
by theology, has scarcely advanced a single step. Man's superstitious
systems have rendered him sceptical on the most demonstrable truths.
Superstition, while it pervaded every thing, while it had an universal
influence, served to corrupt the whole: philosophy, dragged in its
train, although it swelled its triumphant procession, was no longer any
thing but an imaginary science: it quitted the real world to plunge into
the sinuosities of the ideal, inconceivable labyrinths of metaphysics;
it neglected nature, who spontaneously opened her book to its
examination, to occupy itself with systems filled with spirits, with
invisible powers, which only served to render all questions more
obscure; which, the more they were probed, the more inexplicable
they became; which took delight in promulgating that which no one was
competent to understand. In all difficulties it introduced the Divinity;
from thence things only became more and more perplexed, until nothing
could be explained. Theological notions appear only to have been
invented to put man's reason to flight; to confound his judgment; to
deceive his mind; to overturn his clearest ideas in every science. In
the hands of the theologian, logic, or the art of reasoning, was nothing
more than an unintelligible jargon, calculated to support sophism,
to countenance falsehood, to attempt to prove the most palpable
contradictions. Morality, as we have seen, became wavering and
uncertain, because it was founded on ideal systems, never in harmony
with themselves, which, on the contrary, were continually contradicting
their own most positive assertions. Politics, as we have elsewhere said,
were cruelly perverted by the fallacious ideas given to sovereigns of
their actual rights. Jurisprudence was determinately submitted to the
caprices of superstition, which shackled labour, chained down human
industry, controuled activity, and fettered the commerce of nations.
Every thing, in short, was sacrificed to the immediate interests of
these theologians: in the place of every rational science, they taught
nothing but an obscure, quarrelsome metaphysics, which but too often
caused the blood of those unhappy people to flow copiously who were
incapable of understanding its hallucinations.

Born an enemy to experience, theology, that supernatural science, was
an invincible obstacle to the progress of the natural sciences, as
it almost always threw itself in their way. It was not permitted to
experimental philosophy, to natural history, to anatomy, to see any
thing but through the jaundiced eye of superstition. The most evident
facts were rejected with disdain, proscribed with horror, when ever they
could not be made to quadrate with the idle hypotheses of superstition.
Virgil, the Bishop of Saltzburg, was condemned by the church, for having
dared to maintain the existence of the antipodes; Gallileo suffered the
most cruel persecutions, for asserting that the sun did not make its
revolution round the earth. Descartes was obliged to die in a foreign
land. Priests, indeed, have a right to be the enemies to the sciences;
the progress of reason must, sooner or later, annihilate superstitious
ideas. Nothing that is founded upon nature, that is bottomed upon truth,
can ever be lost; while the systems of imaginations, the creeds of
imposture, must be overturned. Theology unceasingly opposed itself to
the happiness of nations--to the progress of the human mind--to useful
researches--to the freedom of thought; it kept man in ignorance; all
his steps being guided by it, he was no more than a tissue of errors.
Indeed, is it resolving a question in natural philosophy, to say that
an effect which excites our surprise, that an unusual phenomenon, that a
volcano, a deluge, a hurricane, a comet, &c. are either signs of divine
wrath, or works contrary to the laws of nature? In persuading nations,
as it has done, that the calamities, whether physical or moral, which
they experience, are the effects of the divine anger, or chastisements
which his power inflicts on them, has it not, in fact, prevented them
from seeking after remedies for these evils? Would it not have been more
useful to have studied the nature of things, to have sought in nature
herself, or in human industry, for succours against those sorrows
with which mortals are afflicted, than to attribute the evil which
man experiences to an unknown power, against whose will it cannot be
supposed there exists any relief? The study of nature, the search after
truth, elevates the soul, expands the genius, is calculated to render
man active, to make him courageous. Theological notions appear to
have been made to debase him, to contract his mind, to plunge him into
despondence. In the place of attributing to the divine vengeance those
wars, those famines, those sterilities, those contagions, that multitude
of calamities, which desolate the earth; would it not have been more
useful, more consistent with truth, to have shewn man that these evils
were to be ascribed to his own folly, or rather to the unruly passions,
to the want of energy, to the tyranny of some princes, who sacrifice
nations to their frightful delirium? The irrational people, instead of
amusing themselves with expiations for their pretended crimes, seeking
to render themselves acceptable to imaginary powers; should they not
rather have sought in a more healthy administration, the true means of
avoiding those scourges, to which they were the victims? Natural evils
demand natural remedies: ought not experience then long since to
have convinced mortals of the inefficacy of supernatural remedies, of
expiatory sacrifices, of fastings, of processions, &c. which almost all
the people of the earth have vainly opposed to the disasters which they
experienced?

Let us then conclude, that theology with its notions, far from being
useful to the human species, is the true source of all those sorrows
which afflict the earth of all those errors by which man is blinded; of
those prejudices which benumb mankind; of that ignorance which renders
him credulous; of those vices which torment him; of those governments
which oppress him. Let us be fully persuaded that those theological,
supernatural ideas, with which man is inspired from his infancy, are
the actual causes of his habitual folly; are the springs of his
superstitious quarrels; of his sacred dissensions; of his inhuman
persecutions. Let us, at length, acknowledge, that they are these fatal
ideas which have obscured morality; corrupted polities; retarded the
progress of the sciences; annihilated happiness; banished peace from the
bosom of mankind, Then let it be no longer dissimulated, that all those
calamities, for which man turns his eyes towards heaven, bathed in
tears, have their spring in the imaginary systems he has adopted:
let him, therefore, cease to expect relief from them; let him seek
in nature, let him search in his own energies, those resources, which
superstition, deaf to his cries, will never procure for him. Let him
consult the legitimate desires of his heart, and he will find that which
he oweth to himself, also that which he oweth to others; let him examine
his own essence, let him dive into the aim of society, from thence he
will no longer be a slave; let him consult experience, he will find
truth, and he will discover, that _error can never possible render him
happy._





CHAP. X.

_Man can form no Conclusion from the Ideas which are offered him of the
Divinity.--Of their want of just Inference.--Of the Inutility of his
Conduct._


It has been already stated, that ideas to be useful, must be founded
upon truth; that experience must at all times demonstrate their justice:
if, therefore, as we have proved, the erroneous ideas which man has in
almost all ages formed to himself of the Divinity, far from being of
utility, are prejudicial to morality, to politics, to the happiness of
society, to the welfare of the individuals who compose it, in short, to
the progress of the human understanding; reason, and our interest, ought
to make us feel the necessity of banishing from our mind these illusive,
futile opinions, which can never do more than confound it--which can
only disturb the tranquillity of our hearts. In vain should we flatter
ourselves with arriving at the correction of theological notions;
erroneous in their principles, they are not susceptible of reform. Under
whatever shape an error presents itself, as soon as man shall attach an
undue importance to it, it will, sooner or later, finish by producing
consequences dangerous in proportion to their extent. Besides, the
inutility of those researches, which in all ages have been made after
the true nature of the Divinity, the notions that have hitherto been
entertained, have done little more than throw it into greater obscurity,
even to those who have most profoundly meditated on the subject; then,
ought not this very inutility to convince us that this subject is not
within the reach of our capacity that this being will not be better
known to us, or by our descendants, than it hath been to our ancestors,
either the most savage or the most ignorant? The object, which of all
others man has at all times reasoned upon the most, written upon the
most, nevertheless remains the least known; far from progressing in his
research, time, with the aid of theological ideas, has only rendered
it more impossible to be conceived. If the Divinity be such as dreaming
theology depicts, he must himself be a Divinity who is competent to form
an idea of him. We know little of man, we hardly know ourselves, or our
own faculties, yet we are disposed to reason upon a being inaccessible
to our senses. Let us, then, travel in peace over the line described for
us by nature, without having a wish to diverge from it, to hunt after
vague systems; let us occupy ourselves with our true happiness; let us
profit of the benefits spread before us; let us labour to multiply them,
by diminishing the number of our errors; let us quietly submit to those
evils we cannot avoid, and not augment them by filling our mind with
prejudices calculated to lead us astray. When we shall give it serious
reflection, every thing will clearly prove that the pretended science of
theology is, in truth, nothing but presumptuous ignorance, masked under
pompous, unintelligible words. In short, let us terminate unfruitful
researches; be content at least to acknowledge our invincible ignorance;
it will clearly be more substantively advantageous, than an arrogant
science, which has hitherto done little more than sow discord on the
earth--affliction in the heart of man.

In supposing a sovereign intelligence who governs the world; in
supposing a Divinity who exacts from his creatures that they should
have a knowledge of him, that they should understand his attributes,
his wisdom, his power; who is desirous they should render him homage; it
must be allowed, that no man on earth in this respect completely fulfils
the views of providence. Indeed, nothing is more demonstrable than the
impossibility in which the theologians find themselves, to form to their
mind any idea whatever of the Divinity. Procopius, the first bishop of
the Goths, says in the most solemn manner: "I esteem it a very foolish
temerity to be disposed to penetrate into the knowledge of the nature of
God;" and further on he acknowledges, "that he has nothing more to say
of him, except that he is perfectly good. He who knoweth more, whether
he be ecclesiastic or layman, has only to tell it." The weakness, the
obscurity of the proofs offered, of the systems attributed to him, the
manifest contradictions into which they fall, the sophisms, the begging
of the question, which are employed, evidently prove they are themselves
in the greatest incertitude upon the nature of that being with whom it
is their profession to occupy their thoughts: even the author of _A
New View of Society_ acknowledges, "that up to this moment it is, not
possible yet to say which is right or which is wrong: that had any one
of the various opposing systems which until this day have governed the
world, and disunited man from man, been true, without any mixture of
error; that system, very speedily after its public promulgation, would
have pervaded society, and compelled all men to have acknowledged its
truth." But granting that they have a knowledge of this being, that
his essence, his attributes, his systems, were so fully demonstrated to
them, as no longer to leave any doubt in their mind, do the rest of the
human race enjoy the same advantages? Are they, in fact, in a condition
to be charged with this knowledge? Ingenuously, how many persons are
to be found in the world, who have the leisure, the capacity, the
penetration, necessary to understand what is meant to be designated
under the name of an immaterial being--of a pure spirit, who moveth
matter without being himself matter; who is the motive of all the powers
of nature, without being contained in nature--without being able to
touch it? Are there, in the most religious societies, many persons who
are competent to follow their spiritual guides, in the subtle proofs
which they adduce in evidence of their creeds, upon which they bottom
their systems of theology?

Without question very few men are capable of profound, connected
meditation; the exercise of intense thought is, for the greater number,
a species of labour as painful as it is unusual. The people, obliged
to toil hard, in order to obtain subsistence, are commonly incapable of
reflection; nobles, men of the world, women, young people, occupied with
their own immediate affairs, taken up with gratifying their passions,
employed in procuring themselves pleasure, as rarely think deeply as the
uninformed. There are not, perhaps, two men in an hundred thousand,
who have seriously asked themselves the question, _What it is they
understand by the word God?_ Whilst it is extremely rare to find persons
to whom the nature of God is a problem. Nevertheless, as we have said,
conviction supposes that evidence alone has banished doubt from the
mind. Where, then, are the web who are convinced of the rectitude
of these systems? Who are those in whom we shall find the complete
certitude of these truths, so important to all? Who are the persons, who
have given themselves an accurate account of the ideas they have
formed upon the Divinity, upon his attributes, upon his essence? Alas!
throughout the whole world, are only to be seen some speculators, who,
by dint of occupying themselves with the idea, have, with great fatuity,
believed they have discovered something decisive in the confused,
unconnected wanderings of their own imagination; they have, in
consequence, endeavoured to form a whole, which, chimerical as it is,
they have accustomed themselves to consider as actually existing: by
force of musing upon it, they have sometimes persuaded themselves they,
saw it distinctly; these have not unfrequently succeeded in making
others believe, their reveries, although they may not have mused upon it
quite so much as themselves.

It is seldom more than hearsay, that the mass of the people adopt
either the systems of their fathers, or of their priests: authority,
confidence, submission, habit, take place of conviction--supersede
proof; they prostrate themselves before idols, lend themselves to
different creeds, because their ancestors have taught them to fall down,
and worship; but never do they inquire wherefore they bend the knee: it
is only because, in times far distant, their legislators, their guides,
have imposed it upon them as a duty; these have said, "adore and believe
those gods, whom ye cannot comprehend; yield yourselves in this
instance to our profound wisdom; we know more than ye do respecting
the Divinity." But wherefore, it might be inquired, should I take this
system upon your authority? It is, they will reply, because the gods
will have it thus; because they will punish you, if you dare to resist.
But are not these gods the thing in question? Nevertheless, man has
always been satisfied with this circle of errors; the idleness of his
mind made him find it most easy to yield to the judgment of others.
All superstitions are uniformly founded upon error, established by
authority; equally forbid examination; are equally indisposed to permit
that man should reason upon them; it is power that wills he should
unconditionally accredit them: they are rested solely upon the influence
of some few men, who pretend to a knowledge of things, which they admit
are incomprehensible for all their species; who, at the same time,
affirm they are sent as missionaries to announce them to the inhabitants
of the earth: these inconceivable systems, formed in the brain of some
enthusiastic persons, have most unquestionably occasion for men to
expound them to their fellows. Man is generally credulous as a child
upon those objects which relate to superstition; he is told he must
believe them; as he generally understands nothing of the matter, he
imagines he runs no risk in joining sentiments with his priest, whom he
supposes has been competent to discover what he himself is not able to
comprehend. The most rational people argue thus: "What shall I do? What
interest can so many persons have to deceive?" But, seriously, does this
prove that they do not deceive? They may do it from two motives: either
because they are themselves deceived, or because they have a great
interest in deceiving. By the confession of the theologians themselves,
man is, for the greater part, without _religion_: he has only
_superstition_. Superstition, according to them, "is a worship of the
Divinity, either badly understood or irrational," or else, "worship
rendered to a false Divinity." But where are the people or the clergy
who will allow, either that their Divinity is false, or their worship
irrational? How shall it be decided who is right, or who is wrong? It
is evident that in this affair great numbers must be wrong. Indeed,
Buddaeus, in his _Treatise on Atheism_, tells us, "in order that a
religion may be true, not only the object of the worship must be true,
but we must also have a just idea of it. He, then, who adoreth God
without knowing him, adoreth him in a perverse and corrupt manner, and
is generally guilty of superstition." This granted, would it not be fair
to demand of the theologians, if they themselves can boast of having a
_just idea_ or real knowledge of the Divinity?

Admit for a moment they have, would it not then be evident, that it is
for the priest, for the inspired, for the metaphysician, that this
idea, which is said to be so necessary for the whole human race, is
exclusively reserved? If we examine, however, we shall not find any
harmony among the theological notions of these various inspired men, or
of that hierarchy which is scattered over the earth: even those who
make a profession of the same system, are not in unison upon the
leading points. Are they ever contented with the proofs offered by their
colleagues? Do they unanimously subscribe to each other's ideas?
Are they agreed upon the conduct to be adopted; upon the manner of
explaining their texts; upon the interpretation of the various oracles?
Does there exist one country upon the whole earth, where the science of
theology is actually perfectioned?--where the ideas of the Divinity are
rendered so clear, as not to admit of cavil? Has this science obtained
any of that steadiness, any of that consistency, any of that uniformity,
which is found attached to other branches of human knowledge; even to
the most futile arts, or to those trades which are most despised?
Has the multitude of subtle distinctions, with which theology in some
countries is filled throughout; have the words spirit, immateriality,
incorporeity, predestination, grace, with other ingenious inventions,
imagined by sublime thinkers, who during so many ages have succeeded
each other, actually had any other effect than to perplex things; to
render the whole obscure; decidedly unintelligible? Alas! do, they not
offer practical demonstration, that the science held forth as the most
necessary to man, has not, hitherto, been able to acquire the least
degree of stability; has remained in the most determined state of
indecision; has entirely failed in obtaining solidity? For thousands of
years the most idle dreamers have been relieving each other, meditating
on systems, diving into concealed ways, inventing hypothesis suitable
to develope this important enigma. Their slender success has not at all
discouraged theological vanity; the priests have always spoken of it as
of a thing with which they were most intimately acquainted; they have
disputed with all the pertinancy of demonstrated argument; they
have destroyed each other with the most savage barbarity; yet,
notwithstanding, to this moment, this sublime science remains entirely
unauthenticated; almost unexamined. Indeed, if things were coolly
contemplated, it would be obvious that these theories are not formed for
the generality of mankind, who for the most part are utterly incompetent
to comprehend the aerial subtilities upon which they rest. Who is the
man, that understandeth any thing of the fundamental principles of
these systems? Whose capacity embraces spirituality, immateriality,
incorporeity, or the mysteries of which he is every day informed? Are
there many persons who can boast of perfectly understanding the state of
the question, in those theological disputations, which have frequently
had the potency to disturb the repose of mankind? Nevertheless, even
women believe themselves obliged to take part in the quarrels excited by
these idle speculators, who are of less actual utility, to society, than
the meanest artizan.

Man would, perhaps, have been too happy, if confining himself to those
visible objects which interest him, he had employed half that energy
which he has wasted in researches after incomprehensible systems, upon
perfectioning the real sciences; in giving consistency to his laws; in
establishing his morals upon solid foundations; in spreading a wholesome
education among his fellows. He would, unquestionably, have been much
wiser, more fortunate, if he had agreed to let his idle, unemployed
guides quarrel among themselves unheeded; if he had permitted them
to fathom those depths calculated to astound the mind, to amaze the
intellect, without intermeddling with their irrational disputes. But it
is the essence of ignorance, to attach great importance to every thing
which it doth not understand. Human vanity makes the mind bear up
against difficulties. The more an object eludes our inquiry, the more
efforts we make to compass it; because from thence our pride is spurred
on, our curiosity is set afloat, our passions are irritated, and it
assumes the character of being highly interesting to us. On the other
hand, the more continued, the more laborious our researches have been,
the more importance we attach to either our real or our pretended
discoveries; the more we are desirous not to have wasted our time;
besides, we are always ready warmly to defend the soundness of our own
judgment. Do not let us then be surprised at the interest that ignorant
persons have at all times taken in the discoveries of their priests; nor
at the obstinate pertinacity which they have ever manifested in their
disputes. Indeed, in combating for his own peculiar system, each only
fought for the interests of his own vanity, which of all human passions
is the most quickly alarmed, the most calculated to lead man on to the
commission of great follies.

Theology is truly the vessel of the Danaides. By dint of contradictory
qualities, by means of bold assertions, it has so shackled its own
systems as to render it impossible they should act. Indeed, when even we
should suppose the existence of these theological systems, the reality
of codes so discordant with each other and with themselves, we can
conclude nothing from them to authorize the conduct, or sanction the
mode of worship which they prescribe. If their gods are infinitely good,
wherefore should we dread them? If they are infinitely wise, what reason
have we to disturb ourselves with our condition? If they are omniscient,
wherefore inform them of our wants, why fatigue them with our requests?
If they are omnipresent, of what use can it be to erect temples to them?
If they are lords of all, why make sacrifices to them; why bring them
offerings of what already belongs to them? If they are just, upon what
foundation believe that they will punish those creatures whom they have
filled with imbecility? If their grace works every thing in man, what
reason can there be why he should be rewarded? If they are omnipotent,
how can they be offended; how can we resist them? If they are rational,
how can the enrage themselves against blind mortals, to whom they have
left the liberty of acting irrationally? If they are immutable, by what
right shall we pretend to make them change their decrees? If they are
inconceivable, wherefore should we occupy ourselves with them? If the
knowledge of these systems be the most necessary thing, wherefore are
they not more evident, more consistent, more manifest?

This granted, he who can undeceive himself on the afflicting notions
of these theories, hath this advantage over the credulous, trembling,
superstitious mortal--that he establishes in his heart a momentary
tranquility, which, at least, rendereth him happy in this life. If the
study of nature hath banished from his mind, those chimeras with which
the superstitions man is infested, he, at least, enjoys a security of
which this sees himself deprived. In consulting this nature, his
fears are dissipated, his opinions, whether true or false, acquire a
steadiness of character; a calm succeeds the storm, which panic terror,
the result of wavering notions, excite in the hearts of all men who
occupy themselves with these systems. If the human soul, cheered by
philosophy, had the boldness to consider things coolly; it would no
longer behold the universe submitted to implacable systems, under which
man is continually trembling. If he was rational, he would perceive that
in committing evil he did not disturb nature; that he either injureth
himself alone, or injures other beings capable of feeling the effects of
his conduct, from thence he would know the line of his duties; he would
prefer virtue to vice, for his own permanent repose: he would, for
his own satisfaction, for his own felicity in this world, find himself
deeply interested in the practice of moral goodness; in rendering
virtue habitual; in making it dear to the feeling of his heart: his
own immediate welfare would be concerned in avoiding vice, in detesting
crime, during the short season of his abode among intelligent, sensible
beings, from whom he expects his happiness. By attaching himself to
these rules, he would live contented with his own conduct; he would
be cherished by those who are capable of feeling the influence of his
actions; he would expect without inquietude the term when his existence
should have a period; he would have no reason to dread the existence
which _might_ follow the one he at present enjoys: he would not fear to
be deceived in his reasonings. Guided by demonstration, led gently along
by honesty, he would perceive, that he could have nothing to dread from
a beneficent Divinity, who would not punish him for those involuntary
errors which depend upon the organization, which without his own consent
he has received.

Such a man so conducting himself, would have nothing to apprehend,
whether at the moment of his death, he falls asleep for ever; or whether
that sleep is only a prelude to another existence, in which he shall
find himself in the presence of his God. Addressing himself to the
Divinity, he might with confidence say,

"O God! Father, who hath rendered thyself invisible to thy child!
Inconceivable, hidden Author of all, whom I could not discover! Pardon
me, if my limited understanding hath not been able to know thee, in a
nature, where every thing hath appeared to me to be necessary! Excuse
me, if my sensible heart hath not discerned thine august traits among
those numerous systems which superstitious mortals tremblingly adore:
if, in that assemblage of irreconcileable qualities, with which the
imagination hath clothed thee, I could only see a phantom. How could my
coarse eyes perceive thee in nature, in which all my senses have
never been able to bring me acquainted but with material beings, with,
perishable forms? Could I, by the aid of these senses, discover thy
spiritual essence, of which no one could furnish me any idea? Could
my feeble brain, obliged to form its judgments after its own capacity,
discern thy plans, measure thy wisdom, conceive thine intelligence,
whilst the universe presented to my view a continued mixture of order
and confusion--of good and evil--of formation and destruction? Have I
been able to render homage to the justice of thy priests, whilst I so
frequently beheld crime triumphant, virtue in tears? Could I possibly
acknowledge the voice of a being filled with wisdom, in those ambiguous,
puerile, contradictory oracles, published in thy name in the different
countries of the earth I have quitted? If I have not known thy peculiar
existence, it is because I have not known either what thou couldst be,
where thou couldst be placed, or the qualities which could be assigned
thee. My ignorance is excusable, because it was invincible: my mind
could not bend itself under the authority of men, who acknowledged they
were as little enlightened upon thine essence as myself; who were for
ever disputing among themselves; who were in harmony only in imperiously
crying out to me, to sacrifice to them that reason which thou hadst
given to me; But, oh God! If thou cherishest thy creatures, I also, like
thee, have cherished them; I have endeavoured to render them happy, in
the sphere in which I have lived. If thou art the author of reason,
I have always listened to it--have ever endeavoured to follow it; if
virtue pleaseth thee, my heart hath always honoured it; I have never
willingly outraged it: when my powers have permitted me, I have myself
practised it; I was an affectionate husband, a tender father, a
sincere friend, a faithful subject, a zealous citizen; I have held out
consolation to the afflicted; and if the foibles of my nature have been
either injurious to myself or incommodious to others, I have not at
least made the unfortunate groan under the weight of my injustice. I
have not devoured the substance of the poor--I have not seen without
pity the widow's tears; I have not heard without commiseration the cries
of the orphan. If thou didst render man sociable, if thou was disposed
that society should subsist, if thou wast desirous the community might
be happy, I have been the enemy to all who oppressed him, the decided
foe to all those who deceived him, in order that they might advantage
themselves of his misfortunes.

"If I have not thought properly of thee, it is because my understanding
could not conceive thee; if I have spoken ill of thy systems, it is
because my heart, partaking too much of human nature, revolted against
the odious portrait under which they depicted thee. My wanderings have
been the effect of the temperament which thou hast given me; of the
circumstances in which, without my consent, thou hast placed me; of
those ideas, which in despite of me, have entered into my mind. As thou
art good, as thou art just, (as we are assured thou art) thou wilt not
punish me for the wanderings of mine imagination; for faults caused by
my passions, which are the necessary consequence of the organization
which I have received from thee. Thus I cannot doubt thy justice, I
cannot dread the condition which thou preparest for me. Thy goodness
cannot have permitted that I should incur punishment for inevitable
errors. Thou wouldst rather prevent my being born, than have called me
into the rank of intelligent beings, there to enjoy the fatal liberty of
rendering myself eternally unhappy."

It is thus that a disciple of nature, who, transported all at once into
the regions of space, should find himself in the presence of his God,
would be able to speak, although he should not have been in a condition
to lend himself to all the abstract systems of theology which appear to
have been invented for no other purpose than to overturn in his mind all
natural ideas. This illusory science seems bent an forming its systems
in a manner the most contradictory to human reason; notwithstanding
we are obliged to judge in this world according to its dictates; if,
however, in the succeeding world, there is nothing conformable to this,
what can be of more inutility, than to think of it or reason upon it?
Besides, wherefore should we leave it to the judgment of men, who are,
themselves, only enabled to act after our manner?

Without a very marked derangement of our organs, our sentiments hardly
ever vary upon those objects which either our senses experience, or
which reason has clearly demonstrated, In whatever circumstances we are
found, we have no doubt either upon the whiteness of snow, the light
of day, or the utility of virtue. It is not so with those objects which
depend solely upon our imagination--which are not proved to us by the
constant evidence of our senses; we judge of them variously, according
to the dispositions in which we find ourselves. These dispositions
fluctuate by reason of the involuntary impulse which our organs every
instant receive, on the part of an infinity of causes, either exterior
to ourselves, or else contained within our own frame. These organs are,
without our knowledge, perpetually modified, either relaxed or braced
by the density, more or less, of the atmosphere; by heat and by cold; by
dryness and by humidity; by health and by sickness; by the heat of the
blood; by the abundance of bile; by the state of the nervous system, &c.
These various causes have necessarily an influence upon the momentary
ideas, upon the instantaneous thoughts, upon the fleeting opinions of
man, He is, consequently, obliged to see under a great variety of hues,
those objects which his imagination presents to him; without it all
times having the capacity to correct them by experience: to compare them
by memory. This, without doubt, is the reason why man is continually
obliged to view his gods, to contemplate his superstitious systems,
under such a diversity of aspects, in different periods of his
existence. In the moment, when his fibres find themselves disposed to
he tremulous, he will be cowardly, pusillanimous; he will think of these
systems only with fear and trembling. In the moment, when these same
fibres shall have more tension, he will possess more firmness, he will
then view these systems with greater coolness. The theologian will call
his pusillanimity, "inward feeling;" "warning from heaven;" "secret
inspiration;" but he who knoweth man, will say that this is nothing
more than a mechanical motion, produced by a physical or natural cause.
Indeed, it is by a pure physical mechanism, that we can explain all the
revolutions that take place in the system, frequently from one minute
to another; all the fluctuations in the opinions of mankind; all the
variations of his judgment: in consequence of which we sometimes see him
reasoning justly, sometimes in the most irrational manner.

This is the mode by which, without recurring to grace, to inspirations,
to visions, to supernatural notions, we can render ourselves an account
of that uncertain, that wavering state into which we sometimes behold
persons fall, when there is a question respecting their superstition,
who are otherwise extremely enlightened. Frequently, in despite of all
reasoning, momentary dispositions re-conduct them to the prejudices of
their infancy, upon which on other occasions they appear to be
entirely undeceived. These changes are very apparent, especially under
infirmities, in sickness, or at approach of death. The barometer of the
understanding is then frequently obliged to fall. Those chimeras which
he despised, or which in a state of health, he set down at their true
value, are then realized. He trembles, because his machine is enfeebled;
he is irrational because his brain is incapable of fulfilling its
functions with exactitude. It is evident these are the actual causes
of those changes which the priests well know how to make use of against
what they call incredulity; from which they draw proofs of the reality
of their sublimated opinions. Those conversions, or those alterations,
which take place, in the ideas of man, have always their origin in some
derangement of his machine; brought on either by chagrin or by some
other natural or known cause.

Submitted to the continual influence of physical causes, our systems
invariably follow the variations of the body; we reason well when the
body is healthy--when it is soundly constituted; we reason badly when
the corporeal faculties are deranged; from thence our ideas become
disconnected, we are no longer equal to the task of associating them
with precision; we are incapable of finding principles, or to draw
from them just inferences; the brain, in fact, is shaken; we no longer
contemplate any thing under its actual point of view. It is a man of
this kind, who does not see things in frosty weather, under the same
traits as when the season is cloudy, or when it is rainy; he does not
view them in the same manner in sorrow as in gaiety; when in company
as when alone. Good sense suggests to us, that it is when the body is
sound, when the mind is undisturbed by any mist, that we can reason with
accuracy; this state can furnish us with a general standard, calculated
to regulate our judgment; even to rectify our ideas, when unexpected
causes shall make them waver.

If the opinions even of the same individual, are fluctuating, subject to
vaccillate, how many changes must they experience in the various beings
who compose the human race? If there do not, perhaps, exist two persons
who see a physical object under the same exact form or colour, what much
greater variety must they not have in their mode of contemplating those
things which have existence only in their imagination? What an infinity
of combinations, what a multitude of ideas, must not minds essentially
different, form to themselves when they endeavour to compose an ideal
being, which each moment of their existence must present to them under
a different aspect? It would, then, be a most irrational enterprise,
to attempt to prescribe to man what he ought to think of superstition,
which is entirely under the cognizance of his imagination; for the
admeasurement of which, as we have very frequently repeated, mortals
will never have any common standard. To oppugn the superstitious
opinions of man, is to commence hostilities with his imagination--to
attack his fancy--to be at war with his organization--to enter the lists
with his habits, which are of themselves sufficient to identify with
his existence, the most absurd, the most unfounded ideas. The more
imagination man has, the greater enthusiast he will be in matters of
superstition; reason will have the less ability to undeceive him in
his chimeras. In proportion as his fancy is powerful, these chimeras
themselves will become food necessary to its ardency. In fine, to battle
with the superstitious notions of man, is to combat the passions he
usually indulges for the marvellous; it is to assail him on that side
where he is least vulnerable; to force him in that position where he
unites all his strength--where he keeps the most vigilant guard. In
despite of reason, those persons who have a lively imagination, are
perpetually re-conducted to those chimeras which habit renders dear to
them, even when they are found troublesome; although they should prove
fatal. Thus a tender soul hath occasion for a God that loveth him;
the happy enthusiast needeth a God who rewardeth him; the unfortunate
visionary wants a God who taketh part in his sorrows; the melancholy
devotee requireth a God who chastiseth him, who maintaineth him in that
trouble which has become necessary to his diseased organization; the
frantic penitent exacteth a God, who imposes upon him an obligation to
be inhuman towards himself; whilst the furious fanatic would believe
himself unhappy, if he was deprived of a God who commanded him to make
others experience the effect of his inflamed humours, of his unruly
passions.

He is, without question, a less dangerous enthusiast who feeds himself
with agreeable illusions, than he whose soul is tormented with odious
spectres. If a placid, tender soul, does not commit ravages in society,
a mind agitated by incommodious passions, cannot fall to become, sooner
or later, troublesome to his fellow creatures. The God of a Socrates, or
a Fenelon, may be suitable to souls as gentle as theirs; but he cannot
be that of a whole nation, in which it is extremely rare men of their
temper are found: if honest men only view their gods as fitted with
benefits; vicious, restless, inflexible individuals, will give them
their own peculiar character, from thence will authorize themselves to
indulge, a free course to their passions. Each will view his deities
with eyes only open to his own reigning prejudice; the number of those
who will paint them as afflicting will always be greater, much more to
be feared, than those who shall delineate them under seducing colors:
for one mortal that those ideas will render happy, there will be
thousands who will be made miserable; they will, sooner or later,
become an inexhaustible source of contention; a never failing spring of
extravagant folly; they will disturb the mind of the ignorant, over whom
impostors will always gain ascendancy--over whom fanatics will ever
have an influence: they will frighten the cowardly, terrify the
pussillanimous, whose imbecility will incline them to perfidy, whose
weakness will render them cruel; they will cause the most upright to
tremble, who, even while practising virtue, will fear incurring the
divine displeasure; but they will not arrest the progress of the wicked,
who will easily cast them aside, that they may the more commodiously
deliver themselves up to crime; or who will even take advantage of these
principles, to justify their transgression. In short, in the hands
of tyrants, these systems will only serve to crush the liberty of the
people; will be the pretext for violating, with impunity, all equitable
rights. In the hands of priests they will become talismans, suitable
to intoxicate the mind; calculated to hoodwink the people; competent
to subjugate equally the sovereign as the subject; in the hands of the
multitude, they will be a two-edged sword, with which they will inflict,
at the same moment, the most dreadful wounds on themselves--the most
serious injuries on their associates.

On the other hand, these theological systems, as we have seen, being
only an heap of contradictions, which represent the Divinity under the
most incompatible characters, seem to doubt his wisdom, when they invite
mortals to address their prayers to him, for the gratification of their
desires; to pray to him to grant that which he has not thought it
proper to accord to them. Is it not, in other words, to accuse him with
neglecting his creatures? Is it not to ask him to alter the eternal
decrees of his justice; to change the invariable laws which he hath
himself determined? Is it not to say to him, "O, my God! I acknowledge
thy wisdom, thine omniscience, thine infinite goodness; nevertheless,
thou forgettest thy servant; thou losest sight of thy creature; thou
art ignorant, or thou feignest ignorance, of that which he wanteth: dost
thou not see that I suffer from the marvellous arrangement, which thy
wise laws have made in the universe? Nature, against thy commands,
actually renders my existence painful: change then, I beseech thee, the
essence which thy will has given to all beings. Grant that the elements,
at this moment, lose in my favor their distinguishing properties; so
order it, that heavy bodies shall not fall, that fire shall not burn,
that the brittle frame which I have received at thine hands, shall not
suffer those shocks which it every instant experiences. Rectify, I pray
thee, for my happiness, the plan which thine infinite prudence hath
marked out from all eternity." Such is very nearly the euchology
which man adopts; such are the discordant, absurd requests which he
continually puts up to the Divinity, whose wisdom he extols; whose
intelligence he holds forth to admiration; whose providence he
eulogizes; whose equity he applauds; whilst he is hardly ever contented
with the effects of the divine perfections.

Man is not more consequent in those thanksgivings which he believes
himself obliged to offer to the throne of grace. Is it not just, he
exclaims, to thank the Divinity for his kindness? Would it not be
the height of ingratitude to refuse our homage to the Author of our
existence; to withhold our acknowledgements from the Giver of every
thing that contributes to render it agreeable? But does he not
frequently offer up his thanksgivings for actions that overwhelm his
neighbour with misery? Does not the husbandman on the hill, return
thanks for the rain that irrigates his lands parched with drought,
whilst the cultivator of the valley is imploring a cessation of those
showers which deluge his fields--that render useless the labour of his
hands? Thus each becomes thankful for that which his own limited views
points out to him as his immediate interest, regardless of the general
effect produced by those circumstances on the welfare of his fellows.
Each believes that it is either a peculiar dispensation of providence
in his own favor, or a signal of the heavenly wrath directed against
himself; whilst the slightest reflection would clearly evince it to
be nothing more than the inevitable order of things, which take place
without the least regard to his individual comforts. From this it will
be obvious, that these systems do not teach their votaries, practically,
to love their neighbour as themselves. But in matters of superstition,
mortals never reason; they only follow the impulse of their fears; the
direction of their imagination; the force of their temperament; the
bent of their own peculiar passions; or those of the guides, who have
acquired the right of controling their understanding. Fear has generally
created these systems; terror unceasingly accompanies them; it is
impossible to reason while we tremble.

We do not, however, flatter ourselves that reason will be capable, all
at once, to deliver the human race from those errors with which so
many causes united have contributed to poison him. The vainest of
all projects would be the expectation of curing, in an instant, those
epidemical follies, those hereditary fallacies, rooted during so many
ages; continually fed by ignorance; corroborated by custom; borne along
by the passions made inveterate by interest; grounded upon the fears,
established upon the ever regenerating calamities of nations. The
ancient disasters of the earth gave birth to the first systems of
theology, new revolutions would equally produce others; even if the
old ones should chance to be forgotton. Ignorant, miserable, trembling
beings, will always either form to themselves systems, or else adopt
those which imposture shall announce--which fanaticism shall be disposed
to give them.

It would therefore be useless to propose more than to hold out reason to
those who are competent to understand it; to present truth to those who
can sustain its lustre; who can with serenity contemplate its refulgent
beauty; to undeceive those who shall not be inclined to oppose obstacles
to demonstration; to enlighten those who shall not desire pertinaciously
to persist in error. Let us, then, infuse courage into those who want
power to break with their illusions; let us cheer up the honest man, who
is much more alarmed by his fears than the wicked, who, in despite of
his opinions, always follows the rule of his passions: let us console
the unfortunate, who groans under a load of prejudices which he has not
examined: let us dissipate the incertitude of those whose doubts
render them unhappy; who ingenuously seek after truth, but who find in
philosophy itself only wavering opinions little calculated to determine
their fluctuating minds. Let us banish from the man of genius those
chimerical speculations which cause him to waste his time; let us wrest
his gloomy superstition from the intimidated mortal, who, duped by
his vain fears, becomes useless to society; let us remove from the
atrabilarious being those systems that afflict him, that exasperate his
mind, that do nothing more than kindle his anger against his incredulous
neighbour; let us tear from the fanatic those terrible ideas which arm
him with poniards against the happiness of his fellows; let us pluck
from tyrants, let us snatch from impostors, those opinions which enable
them to terrify, to enslave, and to despoil the human species. In
removing from honest men their formidable notions let us not encourage
those of the wicked, who are the enemies of society; let us deprive the
latter of those illegitimate sources, upon which they reckon to expiate
their transgressions; let us substitute actual, present terrors, to
those which are distant and uncertain to those which do not arrest the
most licentious excesses; let us make the profligate blush at beholding
themselves what they really are; let the ministers of superstition
tremble at finding their conspiracies discovered; let them dread the
arrival of the day, when mortals, cured of those errors with which they
have abused them, will no longer be enslaved by their artifice.

If we cannot induce nations to lay aside their inveterate prejudices,
let us, at least, endeavour to prevent them from relapsing into those
excesses, to the commission of which superstition has so frequently
hurried them; let mankind form to himself chimeras, if he cannot do
without them; let him think as he may feel inclined, provided his
reveries do not make him forget that he is a man; that he does not cease
to remember that a sociable being is not formed to resemble the most
ferocious animals. Let us try to balance the fictitious interests
of superstition, by the more immediate advantages of the earth. Let
sovereigns, as well as their subjects, at length acknowledge that the
benefits resulting from truth, the happiness arising from justice,
the tranquillity springing out of wholesome laws, the blessings to be
derived from a rational education, the superiority to be obtained from a
physical, peaceable morality, are much more substantive than those they
vainly expect from their respective superstitious systems, Let them
feel, that advantages so tangible, benefits so precious, ought not to be
sacrificed to uncertain hopes, so frequently contradicted by experience.
In order to convince themselves of these truths, let every rational man
consider the numberless crimes which superstition has caused upon our
globe; let them study the frightful history of theology: let them read
over the biography of its more odious ministers, who have too often
fanned the spirit of discord--kindled the flame of fury--stirred up
the raging fire of madness: let the prince and the people, at least,
sometimes learn to resist the demoniacal passions of these interpreters
of unintelligible systems, which they acknowledge they do not themselves
at all understand, especially when they shall invoke them to be
inhuman; when they shall preach up intolerance; when they invite them to
barbarity; above all, when they shall command them, in the name of their
gods, to stifle the cries of nature; to put down the voice of equity; to
be deaf to the remonstrances of reason; to be blind to the interest of
society.

Feeble mortals! led astray by error, how long will ye permit your
imagination, so active, so prompt to seize on the marvellous, to
continue to seek out of the universe pretexts to render you baneful
to yourselves, injurious to the beings with whom ye live in society?
Wherefore do ye not follow in peace, the simple, easy route marked out
for ye by nature? To what purpose do ye scatter thorns on the road
of life? What avails it, that ye multiply those sorrows to which your
destiny exposes ye? What advantages can ye derive from systems with
which the united efforts of the whole human species have not been
competent to bring ye acquainted? Be content, then, to remain ignorant
of that, which the human mind is not formed to comprehend; which human
intellect is not adequate to embrace: occupy yourselves with truth;
learn the invaluable art of living happy; perfection your morals; give
rationality to your governments; simplify your laws, and rest them on
the pillars of justice; watch over education, and see that it is of
an invigorating quality; give attention to agriculture, and encourage
beneficial improvements; foster those sciences which are actually
useful, and place their professors in the most honorable stations; labor
with ardour, and munificently reward those whose assiduity promotes
the general welfare; oblige nature by your industry to open her immense
stores, to become propitious to your exertions; do these things, and the
gods will oppose nothing to your felicity. Leave to idle thinkers, to
soporific dreamers, to waking visionaries, to useless enthusiasts, the
unproductive task, the unfruitful occupation, of fathoming depths,
from which ye ought sedulously to divert your attention; enjoy with
moderation, the benefits attached to your present existence; augment
their number when reason sanctions the multiplication; but never attempt
to spring yourselves forward, beyond the sphere destined for your
action. If you must have chimeras, permit your fellow creatures to have
theirs also; but never cut the throats of your brethren, when, they
cannot rave in your own manner. If ye will have unintelligible
systems, if ye cannot be contented without marvellous doctrines, if the
infirmities of your nature require an invisible crutch, adopt such as
may best suit with your humour; select those which you may think most
calculated to support your tottering frame; if ye can, let your own
imagination give birth to them; but do not insist on your neighbours
making the same choice with yourself: do not suffer these imaginary
theories to infuriate your mind: let them not so far intoxicate your
understandings, as to make ye mistake the duties ye owe to the real
beings with whom ye are associated. Always remember, that amongst these
duties, the foremost, the most consequential, the most immediate in
its bearing upon the felicity of the human race, stands, _a reasonable
indulgence for the foibles of others_.





CHAP. XI.

_Defence of the Sentiments contained in this Work.--Of Impiety.--Do
there exist Atheists?_


What has been said in the course of this work, ought sufficiently to
undeceive those who are capable of reasoning on the prejudices to which
they attached so much importance. But the most evident truths frequently
crouch under fear; are kept at bay by habit; prove abortive against
the force of enthusiasm. Nothing is more difficult to remove from its
resting place than error, especially when long prescription has given
it full possession of the human mind. It is almost unassailable when
supported by general consent; when it is propagated by education; when
it has acquired inveteracy by custom: it commonly resists every effort
to disturb it, when it is either fortified by example, maintained
by authority, nourished by the hopes, or cherished by the fears of a
people, who have learned to look upon these delusions as the most potent
remedies for their sorrows. Such are the united forces which sustain
the empire of unintelligible systems over the inhabitants of this world;
they appear to give stability to their throne; to render their power
immoveable; to make their reign as lasting as the human race.

We need not, then, be surprised at seeing the multitude cherish their
own blindness; encourage their superstitious notions; exhibit the most
sensitive fear of truth. Every where we behold mortals obstinately
attached to phantoms from which they expect their happiness;
notwithstanding these fallacies are evidently the source of all their
sorrows. Deeply smitten with the marvellous, disdaining the simple,
despising that which is easy of comprehension, but little instructed in
the ways of nature, accustomed to neglect the use of their reason, the
uninformed, from age to age, prostrate themselves before those invisible
powers which they have been taught to adore. To these they address their
most fervent prayers; implore them in their misfortunes, offer them
the fruits of their labour; they are unceasingly occupied either with
thanking their vain idols for benefits they have not received at their
bands, or else in requesting from them favors which they can never
obtain. Neither experience nor reflection can undeceive them; they do
not perceive these idols, the work of their own hands, have always been
deaf to their intreaties; they ascribe it to their own conduct; believe
them to be violently irritated: they tremble, groan out the most dismal
lamentations; sigh bitterly in their temples; strew their altars with
presents; load their priests with their largesses; it never strikes
their attention that these beings, whom they imagine so powerful, are
themselves submitted to nature; are never propitious to their wishes,
but when nature herself is favourable. It is thus that nations are the
accomplices of those who deceive them; are themselves as much opposed to
truth as those who lead them astray.

In matters of superstition, there are very few persons who do not
partake, more or less, of the opinions of the illiterate. Every man who
throws aside the received ideas, is generally considered a madman; is
looked upon as a presumptuous being, who insolently believes himself
much wiser than his associates. At the magical sound of superstition, a
sudden panic, a tremulous terror takes possession of the human species:
whenever it is attacked, society is alarmed; each individual imagines
he already sees the celestial monarch lift his avenging arm against
the country in which rebellious nature has produced a monster with
sufficient temerity to brave these sacred opinions. Even the most
moderate persons tax with folly, brand with sedition, whoever dares
combat with these imaginary systems, the rights of which good sense has
never yet examined. In consequence, the man who undertakes to tear the
bandeau of prejudice, appears an irrational being--a dangerous citizen;
his sentence is pronounced with a voice almost unanimous; the public
indignation, roused by fanaticism, stirred up by imposture, renders
it impossible for him to be heard in his defence; every one believes
himself culpable, if he does not exhibit his fury against him; if he
does not display his zeal in hunting him down; it is by such means man
seeks to gain the favor of the angry gods, whose wrath is supposed to be
provoked. Thus the individual who consults his reason, the disciple of
nature, is looked upon as a public pest; the enemy to superstition
is regarded as the enemy to the human race; he who would establish a
lasting peace amongst men, is treated as the disturber of society; the
man who would be disposed to cheer affrighted mortals by breaking those
idols, before whom prejudice has obliged them to tremble, is unanimously
proscribed as an atheist. At the bare name of atheist the superstitious
man quakes; the deist himself is alarmed; the priest enters the
judgement chair with fury glaring in his eyes; tyranny prepares his
funeral pile, the vulgar applaud the punishments which irrational,
partial laws, decree against the true friend of the human species.

Such are the sentiments which every man must expect to excite, who shall
dare to present his fellow creatures with that truth which all appear to
be in search of, but which all either fear to find, or else mistake
what we are disposed to shew it to them. But what is this man, who is
so foully calumniated as an atheist? He is one who destroyeth chimeras
prejudicial to the human race; who endeavours to re-conduct wandering
mortals back to nature; who is desirous to place them upon the road
of experience; who is anxious that they should actively employ their
reason. He is a thinker, who, having meditated upon matter, its
energies, its properties, its modes of acting, hath no occasion to
invent ideal powers, to recur to imaginary systems, in order to explain
the phenomena of the universe--to develope the operations of nature; who
needs not creatures of the imagination, which far from making him better
understand nature, do no more than render it wholly inexplicable, an
unintelligible mass, useless to the happiness of mankind.

Thus, the only men who can have pure, simple, actual ideas of nature,
are considered either as absurd or knavish speculators. Those who
form to themselves distinct, intelligible notions of the powers of the
universe, are accused of denying the existence of this power: those
who found every thing that is operated in this world, upon determinate,
immutable laws, are accused with attributing every thing to chance; are
taxed with blindness, branded with delirium, by those very enthusiasts
themselves, whose imagination, always wandering in a vacuum, regularly
attribute the effects of nature to fictitious causes, which have no
existence but in their own heated brain; to fanciful beings of their
own creation; to chimerical powers, which they obstinately persist in
preferring to actual, demonstrable causes. No man in his proper senses
can deny the energy of nature, or the existence of a power by virtue of
which matter acts; by which it puts itself in motion; but no man can,
without renouncing his reason, attribute this power to an immaterial
substance; to a power placed out of nature; distinguished from matter;
having nothing in common with it. Is it not saying, this power does not
exist, to pretend that it resides in an unknown being, formed by an heap
of unintelligible qualities, of incompatible attributes, from
whence necessarily results a whole, impossible to have existence?
Indestructible elements, the atoms of Epicurus, of which it is said the
motion, the collision, the combination, have produced all beings,
are, unquestionably, much more tangible than the numerous theological
systems, broached in various parts of the earth. Thus, to speak
precisely, they are the partizans of imaginary theories, the advocates
of contradictory beings, the defenders of creeds, impossible to be
conceived, the contrivers of substances which the human mind
cannot embrace on any side, who are either absurd or knavish; those
enthusiasts, who offer us nothing but vague names, of which every thing
is denied, of which nothing is affirmed, are the real _Atheists_; those,
I say, who make such beings the authors of motion, the preservers of the
universe, are either blind or irrational. Are not those dreamers, who
are incapable of attaching any one positive idea to the causes of which
they unceasingly speak, true deniers? Are not those visionaries, who
make a pure nothing the source of all beings, men really groping in
the dark? Is it not the height of folly to personify abstractions, to
organize negative ideas, and then to prostrate ourselves before the
figments of our own brain?

Nevertheless, they are men of this temper who regulate the opinions
of the world; who hold up to public scorn, those who are consistent to
principle; who expose to the most infuriate vengeance, those who are
more rational than themselves. If you will but accredit those profound
dreamers, there is nothing short of madness, nothing on this side
the most complete derangement of intellect, that can reject a totally
incomprehensible motive-power in nature. Is it, then, delirium to prefer
the known to the unknown? Is it a crime to consult experience, to call
in the evidence of our senses, in the examination of that which we are
informed is the most important to be understood? Is it a horrid outrage
to address ourselves to reason; to prefer its oracles to the sublime
decisions of some sophists, who themselves acknowledge they do not
comprehend any thing of the systems they announce? Nevertheless,
according to these men, there is no crime more worthy of
punishment--there is no enterprize more dangerous to morals--no treason
more substantive against society, than to despoil these immaterial
substances, which they know nothing about, of those inconceivable
qualities which these learned doctors ascribe to them--of that equipage
with which a fanatical imagination has furnished them--of those
miraculous properties with which ignorance, fear, and imposture have
emulated each other in surrounding them: there is nothing more impious
than to call forth man's reason upon superstitious creeds; nothing more
heretical than to cheer up mortals against systems, of which the idea
alone is the source of all their sorrows; there is nothing more pious,
nothing more orthodox, than to exterminate those audacious beings who
have had sufficient temerity to attempt to break an invisible charm that
keeps the human species benumbed in error: if we are to put faith in the
asseverations of the hierarchy, to be disposed to break man's chains is
to rend asunder his most sacred bonds.

In consequence of these clamours, perpetually renovated by the disciples
of imposture, kept constantly afloat by the theologians, reiterated
by ignorance, those nations, which reason, in all ages, has sought to
undeceive, have never dared to hearken to its benevolent lessons: they
have stood aghast at the very name of physical truth. The friends of
mankind were never listened to, because they were the enemies to his
superstition--the examiners of the doctrines of his priest. Thus the
people continued to tremble; very few philosophers had the courage to
cheer them; scarcely any one dared brave public opinion; completely
inoculated by superstition, they dreaded the power of imposture,
the menaces of tyranny, which always sought to uphold themselves
by delusion. The yell of triumphant ignorance, the rant of haughty
fanaticism, at all time stifled the feeble voice of the disciple of
nature; his lessons were quickly forgotten; he was obliged to keep
silence; when he even dared to speak, it was frequently only in an
enigmatical language, perfectly unintelligible to the great mass of
mankind. How should the uninformed, who with difficulty compass the most
evident truths, those that are the most distinctly announced, be able to
comprehend the mysteries of nature, presented under half words, couched
under intricate emblems.

In contemplating the outrageous language which is excited among
theologians, by the opinions of those whom they choose to call atheists;
in looking at the punishments which at their instigation were frequently
decreed against them, should we not be authorized to conclude, that
these doctors either are not so certain as they say they are, of the
infallibility of their respective systems; or else that they do not
consider the opinions of their adversaries so absurd as they pretend?
It is always either distrust, weakness, or fear, frequently the whole
united, that render men cruel; they have no anger against those whom
they despise; they do not look upon folly as a punishable crime. We
should be content with laughing at an irrational mortal, who should deny
the existence of the sun; we should not think of punishing him, unless
we had, ourselves, taken leave of our senses. Theological fury never
proves more than the imbecility of its cause. Lucian describes Jupiter,
who disputing with Menippus, is disposed to strike him to the earth with
his thunder; upon which the philosopher says to him, "Ah! thou vexest
thyself, thou usest thy thunder! then thou art in the wrong." The
inhumanity of these men-monsters, whose profession it was to announce
chimerical systems to nations, incontestibly proves, that they alone
have an interest in the invisible powers they describe; of which they
successfully avail themselves to terrify, mortals: they are these
tyrants of the mind, however, who, but little consequent to their own
principles, undo with one hand that which they rear up with the other:
they are these profound logicians who, after having formed a deity
filled with goodness, wisdom and equity, traduce, disgrace, and
completely annihilate him, by saving he is cruel, capricious, unjust,
and despotic: this granted, these men are truly impious; decidedly
heretical.

He who knoweth not this system, cannot do it any injury, consequently
cannot be called impious. "To be impious," says Epicurus, "is not
to take away from the illiterate the gods which they have; it is to
attribute to these gods the opinions of the vulgar." To be impious is to
insult systems which we believe; it is knowingly to outrage them. To be
impious, is to admit a benevolent, just God, at the same time we preach
up persecution and carnage. To be impious, is to deceive men in the
name of a Deity, whom we make use of as a pretext for our own unworthy
passions. To be impious, is to speak falsely on the part of a God, whom
we suppose to be the enemy of falsehood. In fine, to be impious, is to
make use of the name of the Divinity in order to disturb society--to
enslave it to tyrants--to persuade man that the cause of imposture
is the cause of God; it is to impute to God those crimes which would
annihilate his divine perfections. To be impious, and irrational, at
the same time, is to make, by the aggregation of discrepant qualities, a
mere chimera of the God we adore.

On the other hand, to be pious, is to serve our country with fidelity;
it is to be useful to our fellow creatures; to labour to the welfare of
society. Every one can put in his claim to this piety, according to his
faculties; he who meditates can render himself useful, when he has the
courage to announce truth--to attack error--to battle those prejudices
which everywhere oppose themselves to the happiness of mankind; it is to
be truly useful, it is even a duty, to wrest from the hands of mortals
those homicidal weapons which wretched fanatics so profusely distribute
among them; it is highly praiseworthy to deprive imposture of its
influence; it is loving our neighbour as ourself to despoil tyranny of
its fatal empire over opinion, which at all times it so successfully
employs to elevate knaves at the expence of public happiness; to erect
its power upon the ruins of liberty; to establish unruly passions upon
the wreck of public security. To be truly pious, is religiously to
observe the wholesome laws of nature; to follow up faithfully those
duties which she prescribes to us; in short, to be pious is to be
humane, equitable, benevolent: it is to respect the rights of mankind.
To be pious and rational at the same time, is to reject those reveries
which would be competent to make us mistake the sober counsels of
reason.

Thus, whatever fanaticism, whatever imposture may say, he who denieth
the solidity of systems which have no other foundation than an alarmed
imagination; he who rejecteth creeds continually in contradiction with
themselves; he who banisheth from his heart, doctrines perpetually
wrestling with nature, always in hostility with reason, ever at war
with the happiness of man; he, I repeat, who undeceiveth himself on
such dangerous chimeras, when his conduct shall not deviate from those
invariable rules which sound morality dictates, which nature approves,
which reason prescribes, may be fairly reputed pious, honest, and
virtuous. Because a man refuseth to admit contradictory systems, as well
as the obscure oracles, which are issued in the name of the gods, does
it then follow, that such a man refuses to acknowledge the evident,
the demonstrable laws of nature, upon which he depends, of which he in
obliged to fulfil the necessary duties, under pain of being punished in
this world; whatever he may be in the in the next? It is true, that if
virtue could by any chance consist in an ignominious renunciation of
reason, in a destructive fanaticism, in useless customs, the atheist,
as he is called, could not pass for a virtuous being: but if virtue
actually consists in doing to society all the good of which we are
capable, this miscalled atheist may fairly lay claim to its practice:
his courageous, tender soul, will not be found guilty, for hurling his
legitimate indignation against prejudices, fatal to the happiness of the
human species.

Let us listen, however, to the imputations which the theologians lay
upon those men they falsely denominate atheists; let us coolly, without
any peevish humour, examine the calumnies which they vomit forth against
them: it appears to them that atheism, (as they call differing in
opinion from themselves,) is the highest degree of delirium that can
assail the human mind; the greatest stretch of perversity that can
infect the human heart; interested in blackening their adversaries, they
make incredulity the undeniable offspring of folly; the absolute effect
of crime. "We do not," say they to us, "see those men fall into the
horrors of atheism, who have reason to hope the future state will be for
them a state of happiness." In short, according to these metaphysical
doctors, it is the interest of their passions which makes them seek to
doubt systems, at whose tribunals they are accountable for the abuses
of this life; it is the fear of punishment which is alone known to
atheists; they are unceasingly repeating the words of a Hebrew prophet,
who pretends that nothing but folly makes men deny these systems;
perhaps, however, if he had suppressed his negation, he would have
more closely aproximated the truth. Doctor Bentley, in his _Folly of
Atheism_, has let loose the whole Billingsgate of theological spleen,
which he has scattered about with all the venom of the most filthy
reptiles: if he and other expounders are to be believed, "nothing is
blacker than the heart of an atheist; nothing is more false than his
mind. Atheism," according to them, "can only be the offspring of a
tortured conscience, that seeks to disengage itself from the cause of
its trouble. We have a right", says Derham, "to look upon an atheist
as a monster among rational beings; as one of those extraordinary
productions which we hardly ever meet with in the whole human species;
and who, opposing himself to all other men, revolts not only against
reason and human nature, but against the Divinity himself."

We shall simply reply to all these calumnies by saying, it is for the
reader to judge if the system which these men call atheism, be as absurd
as these profound speculators (who are perpetually in dispute on the
uninformed, ill organized, contradictory, whimsical productions of their
own brain) would have it believed to be! It is true, perhaps, that the
system of naturalism hitherto has not been developed in all its extent:
unprejudiced persons however, will, at least, be enabled to know whether
the author has reasoned well or ill; whether or not he has attempted to
disguise the most important difficulties; distinctly to see if he has
been disingenuous; they will be competent to observe if, like unto the
enemies of human reason, he has recourse to subterfuges, to sophisms, to
subtle discriminations, which ought always to make it suspected of those
who use them, either that they do not understand or else that they
fear the truth. It belongs then to candour, it is the province of
disinterestedness, it is the duty of reason to judge, if the natural
principles which have been here ushered to the world be destitute of
foundation; it is to these upright jurisconsults that a disciple of
nature submits his opinions: he has a right to except against the
judgment of enthusiasm; he has the prescription to enter his caveat
against the decision of presumptuous ignorance; above all, he is
entitled to challenge the verdict of interested knavery. Those persons
who are accustomed to think, will, at least find reasons to doubt many
of those marvellous notions, which appear as incontestable truths only
to those, who have never assayed them by the standard of good sense.

We agree with Derham, that atheists are rare; but then we also say,
that superstition has so disfigured nature, so entangled her
rights--enthusiasm has so dazzled the human mind-terror has so disturbed
the heart of man--imposture has so bewildered his imagination--tyranny
has so enslaved his thoughts: in fine, error, ignorance, and delirium
have so perplexed and confused the clearest ideas, that nothing is
more uncommon than to find men who have sufficient courage to undeceive
themselves on notions which every thing conspires to identify with their
very existence. Indeed, many theologians in despite of those bitter
invectives with which they attempt to overwhelm the men they choose
to call atheists, appear frequently to have doubted whether any ever
existed in the world. Tertullian, who, according to modern systems,
would be ranked as an atheist, because he admitted a corporeal God,
says, "Christianity has dissipated the ignorance in which the Pagans
were immersed respecting the divine essence, and there is not an artizan
among the Christians who does not see God, and who does not know him."
This uncertainty of the theologic professors was, unquestionably,
founded upon those absurd ideas, which they ascribe to their
adversaries, whom they have unceasingly accused with attributing every
thing to chance--to blind causes--to dead, inert matter, incapable of
self-action. We have, I think, sufficiently justified the partizans
of nature against these ridiculous accusations; we have throughout the
whole proved, and we repeat it, that chance is a word devoid of sense,
which as well as all other unintelligible words, announces nothing but
ignorance of actual causes. We have demonstrated that matter is not
dead; that nature, essentially active and self-existent, has sufficient
energy to produce all the beings which she contains--all the phenomena
we behold. We have, throughout, made it evident that this cause is much
more tangible, more easy of comprehension, than the inconceivable theory
to which theology assigns these stupendous effects. We have represented,
that the incomprehensibility of natural effects was not a sufficient
reason for assigning to them a system still more incomprehensible than
any of those of which, at least, we have a slight knowledge. In fine, if
the incomprehensibility of a system does not authorize the denial of
its existence, it is at least certain that the incompatibility of the
attributes with which it is clothed, authorizes the assertion, that
those which unite them cannot be any thing more than chimeras, of which
the existence is impossible.

This granted, we shall be competent to fix the sense that ought to be
attached to the name of atheist; which, notwithstanding, the theologians
lavish on all those who deviate in any thing from their opinions. If,
by atheist, be designated a man who denieth the existence of a power
inherent in matter, without which we cannot conceive nature, and if it
be to this power that the name of God is given, then there do not exist
any atheists, and the word under which they are denominated would only
announce fools. But if by atheists be understood men without enthusiasm;
who are guided by experience; who follow the evidence of their senses;
who see nothing in nature but what they actually find to have existence,
or that which they are capacitated to know; who neither do, nor can
perceive any thing but matter essentially active, moveable, diversely
combined, in the full enjoyment of various properties, capable of
producing all the beings who display themselves to our visual faculties,
if by atheists be understood natural philosophers, who are convinced
that without recurring to chimerical causes, they can explain every
thing, simply by the laws of motion; by the relation subsisting between
beings; by their affinities; by their analogies; by their aptitude to
attraction; by their repulsive powers; by their proportions; by their
combinations; by their decomposition: if by atheists be meant these
persons who do not understand what _Pneumatology_ is, who do
not perceive the necessity of spiritualizing, or of rendering
incomprehensible, those corporeal, sensible, natural causes, which
they see act uniformly; who do not find it requisite to separate the
motive-power from the universe; who do not see, that to ascribe
this power to an immaterial substance, to that whose essence is from
thenceforth totally inconceivable, is a means of becoming more familiar
with it: if by atheists are to be pourtrayed those men who ingenuously
admit that their mind can neither receive nor reconcile the union of the
negative attributes and the theological abstractions, with the human
and moral qualities which are given to the Divinity; or those men who
pretend that from such an incompatible alliance, there could only result
an imaginary being; seeing that a pure spirit is destitute of the organs
necessary to exercise the qualities, to give play to the faculties of
human nature: if by atheists are described those men who reject systems,
whose odious and discrepant qualities are solely calculated to disturb
the human species--to plunge it into very prejudicial follies: if,
I repeat it, thinkers of this description are those who are called
atheists, it is not possible to doubt their existence; and their number
would be considerable, if the light of sound natural philosophy was more
generally diffused; if the torch of reason burnt more distinctly; or
if it was not obscured by the theological bushel: from thence, however,
they would be considered neither as irrational; nor as furious beings,
but as men devoid of prejudice, of whose opinions, or if they prefer it,
whose ignorance, would be much more useful to the human race, than those
ideal sciences, those vain hypotheses, which for so many ages have been
the actual causes of all man's tribulation.

Doctor Cudworth, in his _Intellectual System_, reckons four species of
atheists among the ancients.

First.--The disciples of Anaximander, called _Hylopathians_, who
attributed every thing to matter destitute of feeling. His doctrine was,
that men were born of earth united with water, and vivified by the
beams of the sun; his crime seems to have been, that he made the first
geographical maps and sun-dials; declared the earth moveable and of a
cylindrical form.

Secondly.--The _Atomists_, or the disciples of Democritus, who attribute
every thing, to the concurrence of atoms. His crime was, having first
taught that the milky way was occasioned by the confused light from a
multitude of stars.

Thirdly.--The _Stoics_, or the disciples of Zeno, who admitted a blind
nature acting after certain laws. His crime appears to be, that he
practised virtue with unwearied perseverance, and taught that this
quality alone would render mankind happy.

Fourthly.--The _Hylozoists_, or the disciples of Strato, who attributed
life to matter. His crime consisted in being one of the most acute
natural philosophers of his day, enjoying high favour with Ptolemy
Philadelphus, an intelligent prince, whose preceptor be was.

If, however, by atheists, are meant those men, who are obliged to avow,
that they have not one idea of the system they adore, or which they
announce to others; who cannot give any satisfactory account, either
of the nature or of the essence of their immaterial substances; who
can never agree amongst themselves on the proofs which they adduce in
support of their System; on the qualities or on the modes of action
of their incorporeities, which by dint of negations they render a mere
nothing; who either prostrate themselves, or cause others to bow
down, before the absurd fictions of their own delirium: if, I say,
by atheists, be denominated men of this stamp, we shall be under the
necessity of allowing, that the world is filled with them: we shall even
be obliged to place in this number some of the most active theologians,
who are unceasingly reasoning upon that Which they do not understand;
who are eternally disputing upon points which they cannot demonstrate;
who by their contradictions very efficaciously undermine their own
systems; who annihilate all their own assertions of perfection, by the
numberless imperfections with which they clothe them; who rebel against
their gods by the atrocious character under which they depict them. In
short, we shall be able to consider as true atheists, those credulous,
weak persons, who upon hearsay and from tradition, bend the knee before
idols, of whom they have no other ideas, than those which are furnished
them by their spiritual guides, who themselves acknowledge that they
comprehend nothing about the matter.

What has been said amply proves that the theologians themselves have not
always known the sense they could affix to the word atheist; they have
vaguely attacked, in an indistinct manner, calumniated with it, those
persons whose sentiments and principles were opposed to their own.
Indeed, we find that these sublime professors, always infatuated with
their own particular opinions, have frequently been extremely lavish in
their accusations of atheism, against all those whom they felt a
desire to injure; whose characters it was their pleasure to paint in
unfavourable colours; whose doctrines they wished to blacken; whose
systems they sought to render odious: they were certain of alarming
the illiterate, of rousing the antipathies of the silly, by a loose
imputation, or by a word, to which ignorance attaches the idea of
horror, merely because it is unacquainted with its true sense. In
consequence of this policy, it has been no uncommon spectacle to see the
partizans of the same sect, the adorers of the same gods, reciprocally
treat each other as atheists, in the fervour of their theological
quarrels; to be an atheist, in this sense, is not to have, in every
point, exactly the same opinions as those with whom we dispute, either
on superstitious or religious subjects. In all times the uninformed
have considered those as atheists, who did not think upon the Divinity
precisely in the same manner as the guides whom they were accustomed
to follow. Socrates, the adorer of a unique God, was no more than an
atheist in the eyes of the Athenian people.

Still more, as we have already observed, those persons have frequently
been accused of atheism, who have taken the greatest pains to establish
the existence of the gods, but who have not produced satisfactory
proofs: when their enemies wished to take advantage of them, it was easy
to make them pass for atheists, who had wickedly betrayed their cause,
by defending it too feebly. The theologians have frequently been very
highly incensed against those who believed they had discovered the most
forcible proof of the existence of their gods, because they were obliged
to discover that their adversaries could make very contrary inductions
from their propositions; they did not perceive that it was next to
impossible not to lay themselves open to attack, in establishing
principles visibly founded upon that which each man sees variously.
Thus Paschal says, "I have examined if this God, of whom all the world
speaks, might not have left some marks of himself. I look every where,
and every where I see nothing but obscurity. Nature offers one nothing,
that may not be a matter of doubt and inquietude. If I saw nothing in
nature which indicated a Divinity, I should determine with myself, to
believe nothing about it. If every where I saw the sign of a creator, I
should repose myself in peace, in the belief of one. But seeing too
much to deny, and too little to assure me of his existence, I am in a
situation that I lament, and in which I have an hundred times wished,
that if a God doth sustain nature, he would give unequivocal marks of
it, and that if the signs which he hath given be deceitful, that he
would suppress them entirely; that he said all or nothing, to the end
that I might see which side I ought to follow."

In a word, those who have most vigorously taken up the cause of the
theological systems, have been taxed with atheism and irreligion; the
most zealous partizans have been looked upon as deserters, have been
contemplated as traitors; the most orthodox theologians have not been
able to guarantee themselves from this reproach; they have mutually
bespatered each other; prodigally lavished, with malignant reciprocity,
the most abusive terms: nearly all have, without doubt, merited these
invectives, if in the term atheist be included those men who have
not any idea of their various systems, that does not destroy itself,
whenever they are willing to submit it to the touchstone of reason. From
whence we may conclude, without subjecting ourselves to the reproach of
being hasty, that error will not stand the test of investigation; that
it will not pass the ordeal of comparison; that it is in its hues a
perfect chamelion; that consequently it can never do more than lead to
the most absurd deductions: that the most ingenious systems, when they
have their foundations in hallucination, crumble like dust under the
rude band of the assayer; that the most sublimated doctrines, when they
lack the substantive quality of rectitude, evaporate under the scrutiny
of the sturdy examiner, who tries them in the crucible; that it is
not by levelling abusive language against those who investigate
sophisticated theories, they will either be purged of their absurdities,
acquire solidity, or find an establishment to give them perpetuity; that
moral obliquities, can never be made rectilinear by the mere application
of unintelligible terms, or by the inconsiderate jumble of discrepant
properties, however gaudy the assemblage: in short, that the only
criterion of truth is, _that it is ever consistent with itself_.





CHAP. XII.

_Is what is termed Atheism compatible with Morality?_


After having proved the existence of those whom the superstitious bigot,
the heated theologian, the inconsequent theist, calls _atheists_, let us
return to the calumnies which are so profusely showered upon them by
the deicolists. According to Abady, in his _Treatise on the Truth of the
Christian Religion_, "an atheist cannot be virtuous: to him virtue is
only a chimera; probity no more than a vain scruple; honesty nothing
but foolishness;--he knoweth no other law than his interest: where this
sentiment prevails, conscience is only a prejudice; the law of nature
only an illusion; right no more than an error; benevolence hath no
longer any foundation; the bonds of society are loosened; the ties of
fidelity are removed; friend is ready to betray friend; the citizen to
deliver up his country; the son to assassinate his father, in order
to enjoy his inheritance, whenever they shall find occasion, and that
authority or silence shall shield them from the arm of the secular
power, which alone is to be feared. The most inviolable rights, and
most sacred laws, must no longer be considered, except as dreams
and visions." Such, perhaps, would be the conduct, not of a feeling,
thinking, reflecting being, susceptible of reason; but of a ferocious
brute, of an irrational wretch, who should not have any idea of the
natural relations which subsist between beings, reciprocally necessary
to each other's happiness. Can it actually be supposed, that a man
capable of experience, furnished with the faintest glimmerings of sound
sense, would lend himself to the conduct which is here ascribed to the
atheist; that is to say, to a man who is conversant with the evidence of
facts; who ardently seeks after truth; who is sufficiently susceptible
of reflection, to undeceive himself by reasoning upon those prejudices
which every one strives to shew him as important; which all voices
endeavour to announce to him as sacred? Can it, I repeat, be supposed,
that any enlightened, any polished society, contains a citizen so
completely blind, not to acknowledge his most natural duties; so very
absurd, not to admit his dearest interests; so completely besotted not
to perceive the danger he incurs in incessantly disturbing his fellow
creatures; or in following no other rule, than his momentary appetites?
Is not every human being who reasons in the least possible manner,
obliged to feel that society is advantageous to him; that he hath need
of assistance; that the esteem of his fellows is necessary to his own
individual happiness; provoked, that he has every thing to fear from
the wrath of his associates; that the laws menace whoever shall dare to
infringe them? Every man who has received a virtuous education, who
has in his infancy experienced the tender cares of a parent; who has in
consequence tasted the sweets of friendship; who has received kindness;
who knows the worth of benevolence; who sets a just value upon equity;
who feels the pleasure which the affection of our fellow creatures
procures for us; who endures the inconveniences which result from their
aversion who smarts under the sting which is inflicted by their
scorn, is obliged to tremble at losing, by his measures, such manifest
advantages--at incurring such, imminent danger. Will not the hatred of
others, the fear of punishment, his own contempt of himself, disturb his
repose every time that, turning, inwardly upon his own conduct, he shall
contemplate it under the same perspective as does his neighbour? Is
there then no remorse but for those who believe in incomprehensible
systems? Is the idea that we are tinder the eye of beings of whom we
have but vague notions, more forcible than the thought that we are
viewed by our fellow men; than the fear of being detected by ourselves;
than the dread of exposure; than the cruel necessity of becoming
despicable in our own eyes; than the wretched alternative, to be
constrained to blush guiltily, when we reflect on our wild career, and
the sentiments which it must infallibly inspire?

This granted, we shall reply deliberately to this Abady, that an atheist
is a man who understands nature, who studies her laws; who knows his own
nature; who feels what it imposes upon him. An atheist hath experience;
this experience proves to him every moment that vice can injure him;
that his most concealed faults, his most secret dispositions, may be
detected--may display his character in open day; this experience proves
to him that society is useful to his happiness; that his interest
authoritatively demands he should attach himself to the country that
protects him, which enables him to enjoy in security the benefits of
nature; every thing shews him that in order to be happy he must make
himself beloved; that his parent is for him the most certain of friends;
that ingratitude would remove him from his benefactor; that justice is
necessary to the maintenance of every association; that no man, whatever
way he his power, can be content with himself, when he knows he is an
object of public hatred. He who has maturely reflected upon himself,
upon his own nature, upon that of his associates, upon his own wants,
upon the means of procuring them, cannot prevent himself from becoming
acquainted with his duties--from discovering the obligations he owes to
himself, as well as those which he owes to others; from thence he has
morality, he has actual motives to confirm himself to its dictates; he
is obliged to feel, that these duties are imperious: if his reason be
not disturbed by blind passions, if his mind be not contaminated by
vicious habits, he will find that virtue is the surest road to felicity.
The atheists, as they are styled, or the fatalists, build their system
upon necessity: thus, their moral speculations, founded upon the nature
of things, are at least much more permanent, much more invariable, than
those which only rest upon systems that alter their aspect according
to the various dispositions of their adherents--in conformity with the
wayward passions of those who contemplate, them. The essence of things,
and the immutable laws of nature, are not subject to fluctuate; it
is imperative with the atheist, as he is facetiously called by the
theologian, to call whatever injures himself either vice or folly; to
designate that which injures others, crime; to describe all that is
advantageous to society, every thing which contributes to its permanent
happiness, virtue.

It will be obvious, then, that the principles of the miscalled atheist
are much less liable to be shaken, than those of the enthusiast, who
shall have studied a baby from his earliest Infancy; who should have
devoted not only his days, but his nights, to gleaning the scanty
portion of actual information that he scatters through his volumes;
they will have a much more substantive foundation than those of the
theologian, who shall construct his morality upon the harlequin scenery
of systems that so frequently change, even in his own distempered brain.
If the atheist, as they please to call those who differ in opinion with
themselves, objects to the correctness, of--their systems, he cannot
deny his own existence, nor that of beings similar to himself, by whom
he is surrounded; he cannot doubt the reciprocity of the relations that
subsist between them; he cannot question the duties which spring out
of these relations; Pyrrhonism, then, cannot enter his mind upon the
actual principles of morality; which is nothing more than the science of
the relations of beings living together in society.

If, however, satisfied with a barren, speculative knowledge of his
duties, the atheist of the theologian should not apply them in
his conduct--if, hurried along by the current of his ungovernable
passions--if, borne forward by criminal habits--if, abandoned to
shameful vices-if, possessing a vicious temperament, which he has
not been sedulous to correct--if, lending himself to the stream of
outrageous desires, he appears to forget his moral obligations, it by no
means follows, either that he hath no principles, or that his principles
are false: it can only be concluded from such conduct, that in the
intoxication of his passions, in the delirium of his habits, in the
confusion of his reason, he does not give activity to doctrines grounded
upon truth; that he forgets to give currency to ascertained principles;
that he may follow those propensities which lead him astray. In this,
indeed, he will have dreadfully descended to the miserable level of
the theologian, but he will nevertheless find him the partner of his
folly--the partaker of his insanity--the companion of his crime.

Nothing is, perhaps, more common among men, than a very marked
discrepancy between the mind and the heart; that is to say, between the
temperament, the passions, the habits the caprices, the imagination, and
the judgment, assisted by reflection. Nothing is, in fact, more rare,
than to find these harmoniously running upon all fours with each other;
it is, however, only when they do, that we see speculation influence
practice. The most certain virtues are those which are founded upon
the temperament of man. Indeed, do we not every day behold mortals
in contradiction with themselves? Does not their more sober judgment
unceasingly condemn the extravagancies to which their undisciplined
passions deliver them up? In short, doth not every thing prove to us
hourly, that men, with the very best theory, have sometimes the very
worst practice; that others with the most vicious theory, frequently
adopt the most amiable line of conduct? In the blindest systems, in
the most atrocious superstitions, in those which are most contrary to
reason, we meet with virtuous men, the mildness of whose character, the
sensibility of whose hearts, the excellence of whose temperament, re
conducts them to humanity, makes them fall back upon the laws of nature,
in despite of their furious theories. Among the adorers of the most
cruel, vindictive, jealous gods, are found peaceable, souls, who are
enemies to persecution; who set their faces against violence; who are
decidedly opposed to cruelty: among the disciples of a God filled with
mercy, abounding in clemency, are seen barbarous monsters; inhuman
cannibals: nevertheless, both the one and the other acknowledge, that
their gods ought to serve them for a model. Wherefore, then, do they not
in all things conform themselves? It is because the most wicked systems
cannot always corrupt a virtuous soul; that those which are most bland,
most gentle in their precepts, cannot always restrain hearts driven
along by the impetuosity of vice. The organization will, perhaps, be
always more potential than either superstition or religion. Present
objects, momentary interests, rooted habits, public opinion, have much
more efficacy than unintelligible theories, than imaginary systems,
which themselves depend upon the organic structure of the human frame.

The point in question then is, to examine if the principles of the
atheist, as he is erroneously called, be true, and not whether his
conduct be commendable? An atheist, having an excellent theory, founded
upon nature, grafted upon experience, constructed upon reason, who
delivers himself up to excesses, dangerous to himself, injurious to
society, is, without doubt, an inconsistent man. But he is not more to
be feared than a superstitious bigot; than a zealous enthusiast; or
than even a religious man who, believing in a good, confiding in an
equitable, relying on a perfect God, does not scruple to commit the
most frightful devastations in his name. An atheistical tyrant would
assuredly not be more to be dreaded than a fanatical despot. An
incredulous philosopher, however, is not so mischievous a being as an
enthusiastic priest, who either fans the flame of discord among his
fellow subjects, or rises in rebellion against his legitimate monarch.
Would, then, an atheist clothed with power, be equally dangerous as a
persecuting priest-ridden king; as a savage inquisitor; as a whimsical
devotee; or, as a morose bigot? These are assuredly more numerous in the
world than atheists, as they are ludicrously termed, whose opinions, or
whose vices are far from being in a condition to have an influence
upon society; which is ever too much hoodwinked by the priest, too much
blinded by prejudice, too much the slave of superstition, to be disposed
to give them a patient hearing.

An intemperate, voluptuous atheist, is not more dangerous to society
than a superstitions bigot, who knows how to connect licentiousness,
punic faith, ingratitude, libertinism, corruption of morals, with his
theological notions. Can it, however, be ingeniously imagined, that a
man, because he is falsely termed an atheist, or because he does not
subscribe to the vengeance of the most contradictory systems, will
therefore be a profligate debauche, malicious, and persecuting; that he
will corrupt the wife of his friend; will turn his own wife adrift;
will consume both his time and his money in the most frivolous
gratifications; will be the slave to the most childish amusements; the
companion of the most dissolute men; that he will discard all his
old friends; that he will select his bosom confidents from the brazen
betrayers of their native land--from among the hoary despoilers of
connubial happiness--from out of the ranks of veteran gamblers; that he
will either break into his neighbour's dwelling, or cut his throat;
in short, that he will lend himself to all those excesses, the most
injurious to society, the most prejudicial to himself, the most
deserving public castigation? The blemishes of an atheist, then, as the
theologian styles him, have not any thing more extraordinary in them
than those of the superstitious man; they possess nothing with which his
doctrine can be fairly reproached. A tyrant, who should be incredulous,
would not be a more incommodious scourge to his subjects, than a
theological autocrat, who should wield his sceptre to the misery of his
people. Would the nation of the latter feel more happy, from the
mere circumstance that the tyger who governed it believed in the most
abstract systems, heaped the most sumptuous presents on the priests, and
humiliated himself at their shrine? At least it must be acknowledged,
according to the shewing of the theologian himself, that under
the dominion of the atheist, a nation would not have to apprehend
superstitious vexations; to dread persecutions for opinion; to fear
proscriptions for ill-digested systems; neither would it witness those
strange outrages that have sometimes been Committed for the interests
of heaven, even under the mildest monarchs. If it was the victim to the
turbulent passions of an unbelieving prince, the sacrifice to the folly
of a sovereign who should be an infidel, it would not, at least, suffer
from his blind infatuation, for theological systems which he does not
understand; nor from his fanatical zeal, which of all the passions
that infest monarchs, is ever the most destructive, always the most
dangerous. An atheistical tyrant, who should persecute for opinions,
would be a man not consistent with his own principles; he could not
exist; he would not, indeed, according to the theologian, be an atheist
at most, he would only furnish one more example, that mortals much
more frequently follow the blind impulse of their passions, the more
immediate stimulus of their interest, the irresistible torrent of their
temperament, than their speculations, however grave, however wise.
It is, at least, evident, that an atheist has one pretext less than a
credulous prince, for exercising his natural wickedness.

Indeed, if men condescended to examine things coolly, they would find
that on this earth the name of God is but too frequently made use of as
a motive to indulge the worst of human passions. Ambition, imposture,
and tyranny, have often formed a league to avail themselves of its
influence, to the end that they might blind the people, and bend them
beneath a galling yoke: the monarch sometimes employs it to give a
divine lustre to his person--the sanction of heaven to his rights--the
confidence of its votaries to his most unjust, most extravagant whims.
The priest frequently uses it to give currency to his pretensions, to
the end that he may with impunity gratify his avarice, minister to his
pride, secure his independence. The vindictive, enraged, superstitious
being, introduces the cause of his gods, that he may give free scope to
his fury, which he qualifies with zeal. In short, superstition becomes
dangerous, because it justifies those passions, lends legitimacy to
those crimes, holds forth as commendable those excesses, of which it
does not fail to gather the fruit: according to its ministers, every
thing is permitted to revenge the most high: thus the name of the
Divinity is made use of to authorize the most baneful actions, to
palliate the most injurious transgressions. The atheist, as he is
called, when he commits crimes, cannot, at least, pretend that it is
his gods who command them, or who clothe them with the mantle of their
approval, this is the excuse the superstitious being offers for his
perversity; the tyrant for his persecutions; the priest for his cruelty,
and for his sedition; the fanatic for the ebullition of his boiling
passions; the penitent for his inutility.

"They are not," says Bayle, "the general opinions of the mind, but the
passions, which determine us to act." Atheism, as it is called, is a
system which will not make a good man wicked but it may, perhaps, make
a wicked man good. "Those," says the same author, "who embraced the
sect of Epicurus, did not become debauches because they had adopted
the doctrine of Epicurus; they only lent themselves to the system, then
badly understood, because they were debauches." In the same manner, a
perverse man may embrace atheism, because he will flatter himself, that
this system will give full scope to his passions: he will nevertheless
be deceived. Atheism, as it is called, if well understood, is founded
upon nature and upon reason, which never can, like superstition, either
justify or expiate the crimes of the profligate.

From the diffusion of doctrines which make morality depend upon
unintelligible, incomprehensible systems, that are proposed to man for
a model, there has unquestionably resulted very great inconvenience.
Corrupt souls, in discovering, how much each of these suppositions
are erroneous or doubtful, give loose to the rein of their vices, and
conclude there are not more substantive motives for acting well; they
imagine that virtue, like these fragile systems, is merely chimerical;
that there is not any cogent solid reason for practising it in this
world. Nevertheless, it must be evident, that it is not as the disciples
of any particular tenet, that we are bound to fulfil the duties of
morality; it is as men, living together in society, as sensible beings
seeking to secure to ourselves a happy existence, that we should feel
the moral obligation. Whether these systems maintain their ground, or
whether the do not, our duties will remain the same; our nature, if
consulted, will incontestibly prove, that _vice is a decided evil, that
virtue is an actual, a substantial good_.

If, then, there be found atheists who have denied the distinction
of good and evil, or who have dared to strike at the foundations of
morality; we ought to conclude, that upon this point they have reasoned
badly; that they have neither been acquainted with the nature of man,
nor known the true source of his duties; that they have falsely imagined
that ethics, as well as theology, was only an ideal science; that the
fleeting systems once destroyed, there no longer remained any bonds
to connect mortals. Nevertheless, the slightest reflection would have
incontestibly proved, that morality is founded upon immutable relations
subsisting between sensible, intelligent, sociable beings; that without
virtue, no society can maintain itself; that without putting the curb on
his desires, no mortal can conserve himself: man is constrained from
his nature to love virtue, to dread crime, by the same necessity that
obliges him to seek happiness, and fly from sorrow: thus nature compels
him to place a distinction between those objects which please, and those
objects Which injure him. Ask a man, who is sufficiently irrational to
deny the difference between virtue and vice, if it would be indifferent
to him to be beaten, robbed, calumniated, treated with ingratitude,
dishonoured by his wife, insulted by his children, betrayed by his
friend? His answer will prove to you, that whatever he may say, he
discriminates the actions of mankind; that the distinction between good
and evil, does not depend either upon the conventions of men, or
upon the ideas which they may have of particular systems; upon the
punishments or upon the recompenses which attend mortals in a future
existence.

On the contrary, an atheist, as he is denominated, who should reason
with justness, would feel himself more interested than another in
practising those virtues to which he finds his happiness attached in
this world. If his views do not extend themselves beyond the limits of
his present existence, he must, at least, desire to see his days roll
on in happiness and in peace. Every man, who during the calm of his
passions, falls back upon himself, will feel that his interest invites
him to his own preservation; that his felicity rigorously demands he
should take the necessary means to enjoy life peaceably that it becomes
an imperative duty to himself to keep his actual abode free from alarm;
his mind untainted by remorse. Man oweth something to man, not merely
because he would offend any particular system, if he was to injure his
fellow creature; but because in doing him an injury he would offend a
man; would violate the laws of equity; in the maintenance of which every
human being finds himself interested.

We every day see persons who are possessed of great talents, who have
very extensive knowledge, who enjoy very keen penetration, join to
these advantages a very corrupt heart; who lend, themselves to the most
hideous vices: their opinions may be true in some respects, false in a
great many others; their principles may be just, but their inductions
are frequently defective; very often precipitate. A man may embrace
sufficient knowledge to detect some of his errors, yet command too
little energy to divest himself of his vicious propensities. Man is
a being whose character depends upon his organization, modified
by habit--upon his temperament, regulated by education--upon his
propensities, marshalled by example--upon his; passions, guided by
his government; in short, he is only what transitory or permanent
circumstances make him: his superstitious ideas are obliged to yield to
this temperament; his imaginary systems feel a necessity to accommodate
themselves to his propensities; his theories give way to his interests.
If the system which constitutes man an atheist in the eyes of this
theologic friend, does not remove him from the vices with which he was
anteriorly tainted, neither does it tincture him with any new ones;
whereas, superstition furnishes its disciples with a thousand pretexts
for committing evil without repugnance; induces them even to applaud
themselves for the commission of crime. Atheism, at least, leaves men
such as they are; it will neither increase a man's intemperance, nor
add to his debaucheries, it will not render him more cruel than his
temperament before invited him to be: whereas superstition either
lacks the rein to the most terrible passions, gives loose to the most
abominable suggestions, or else procures easy expiations for the most
dishonourable vices. "Atheism," says Chancellor Bacon, "leaves to man
reason, philosophy, natural piety, laws, reputation, and every thing
that can serve to conduct him to virtue; but superstition destroys all
these things, and erects itself into a tyranny over the understandings
of men: this is the reason why atheism never disturbs the government,
but renders man more clear-sighted, as seeing nothing beyond the bounds
of this life." The same author adds, "that the times in which men
have turned towards atheism, have been the most tranquil; whereas
superstition has always inflamed their minds, and carried them on to
the greatest disorders; because it infatuates the people with novelties,
which wrest from and carry with them all the authority of government."

Men, habituated to meditate, accustomed to make study a pleasure, are
not commonly dangerous citizens: whatever may be their speculations,
they never produce sudden revolutions upon the earth. The winds of the
people, at all times susceptible to be inflamed by the marvellous, their
dormant passions liable to be aroused by enthusiasm, obstinately resist
the light of simple truths; never heat themselves for systems that
demand a long train of reflection--that require the depth of the
most acute reasoning. The system of atheism, as the priests choose to
denominate it, can only be the result of long meditation; the fruit of
connected study; the produce of an imagination cooled by experience: it
is the child of reason. The peaceable Epicurus never disturbed Greece;
his philosophy was publicly taught in Athens during many centuries; he
was in incredible favour with his countrymen, who caused statues to be
erected to him; he had a prodigious number of friends, and his school
subsisted for a very long period. Cicero, although a decided enemy
to the Epicureans, gives a brilliant testimony to the probity both
of Epicurus and his disciples, who were remarkable for the inviolable
friendship they bore each other. In the time of Marcus Aurelius, there
was at Athens a public professor of the philosophy of Epicurus, paid
by that emperor, who was himself a stoic. Hobbes did not cause blood to
flow in England, although in his time, religious fanaticism made a king
perish on the scaffold. The poem of Lucretius caused no civil wars
in Rome; the writings of Spinosa did not excite the same troubles in
Holland as the disputes of Gomar and D'Arminius. In short, we can defy
the enemies to human reason to cite a single example, which proves in a
decisive manner that opinions purely philosophical, or directly contrary
to superstition, have ever excited disturbances in the state. Tumults
have generally arisen from theological notions, because both princes and
people have always foolishly believed they ought to take a part in
them. There is nothing so dangerous as that empty philosophy, which
the theologians have combined with their systems. It is to philosophy,
corrupted by priests, that it peculiarly belongs to blow up the embers
of discord; to invite the people to rebellion; to drench the earth with
human blood. There is, perhaps, no theological question, which has not
been the source of immense mischief to man; whilst all the writings of
those denominated atheists, whether ancient or modern, have never caused
any evil but to their authors; whom dominant imposture has frequently
immolated at his deceptive shrine.

The principles of atheism are not formed for the mass of the people,
who are commonly under the tutelage of their priests; they are
not calculated for those frivolous capacities, not suited to those
dissipated minds, who fill society with their vices, who hourly afford
evidence of their own inutility; they will not gratify the ambitious;
neither are they adapted to intriguers, nor fitted for those restless
beings who find their immediate interest in disturbing the harmony
of the social compact: much less are they made for a great number of
persons, who, enlightened in other respects, have not sufficient courage
to divorce themselves from the received prejudices.

So many causes unite themselves to confirm man in those errors which he
draws in with his mother's milk, that every step that removes him from
these endeared fallacies, costs him uncommon pain. Those persons who
are most enlightened, frequently cling on some side to the general
prepossession. By giving up these revered ideas, we feel ourselves, as
it were, isolated in society: whenever we stand alone in our opinions,
we no longer seem to speak the language of our associates; we are apt
to fancy ourselves placed on a barren, desert island, in sight of a
populous, fruitful country, which we can never reach: it therefore
requires great courage to adopt a mode of thinking that has but few
approvers. In those countries where human knowledge has made some
progress; where, besides, a certain freedom of thinking is enjoyed, may
easily be found a great number of deicolists, theists, or incredulous
beings, who, contented with having trampled under foot the grosser
prejudices of the illiterate, have not dared to go back to the
source--to cite the more subtle systems before the tribunal of reason.
If these thinkers did not stop on the road, reflection would quickly
prove to them that those systems which they have not the fortitude
to examine, are equally injurious to sound ratiocination, fully
as revolting to good sense, quite as repugnant to the evidence
of experience, as any of those doctrines, mysteries, fables, or
superstitious customs, of which they have already acknowledged the
futility; they would feel, as we have already proved, that all these
things are nothing more than the necessary consequences of those
primitive errors which man has indulged for so many ages in succession;
that in admitting these errors, they no longer have any rational cause
to reject the deductions which the imagination has drawn from them. A
little attention would distinctly shew them, that it is precisely these
errors that are the true cause of all the evils of society; that those
endless disputes, those sanguinary quarrels, to which superstition and
the spirit of party every instant give birth, are the inevitable effects
of the importance they attach to errors which possess all the means of
distraction, that scarcely ever fail to put the mind of man into a state
of combustion. In short, nothing is more easy than to convince ourselves
that imaginary systems, not reducible to comprehension, which are always
painted under terrific aspects, must act upon the imagination in a
very lively manner, must sooner or later produce disputes--engender
enthusiasm--give birth to fanaticism--end in delirium.

Many persons acknowledge, that the extravagances to which superstition
lends activity, are real evils; many complain of the abuse of
superstition, but there are very few who feel that this abuse, together
with the evils, are the necessary consequences of the fundamental
principles of all superstition; which are founded upon the most grievous
notions, which rest themselves on the most tormenting opinions. We
daily see persons undeceived upon superstitious ideas, who nevertheless
pretend that this superstition "is salutary for the people;" that
without its supernatural magic, they could not be kept within due
bounds; in other words, could not be made the voluntary slaves of the
priest. But, to reason thus, is it not to say, poison is beneficial to
mankind, that therefore it is proper to poison them, to prevent them
from making an improper use of their power? Is it not in fact to pretend
it is advantageous to render them absurd; that it is a profitable course
to make them extravagant; wholesome to give them an irrational bias;
that they have need of hobgoblins to blind them; require the most
incomprehensible systems to make them giddy; that it is imperative
to submit them either to impostors or to fanatics, who will avail
themselves of their follies to disturb the repose of the world? Again,
is it an ascertained fact, does experience warrant the conclusion, that
superstition has a useful influence over the morals of the people? It
appears much more evident, is much better borne out by observation,
falls more in with the evidence of the senses, that it enslaves them
without rendering them better; that it constitutes an herd of ignorant
beings, whom panic terrors keep under the yoke of their task-masters;
whom their useless fears render the wretched instruments of towering
ambition--of rapacious tyrants; of the subtle craft of designing
priests: that it forms stupid slaves, who are acquainted with no other
virtue, save a blind submission to the most futile customs, to which
they attach a much more substantive value than to the actual virtues
springing out of the duties of morality; or issuing from the social
compact which has never been made known to them. If by any chance,
superstition does restrain some few individuals, it has no effect on
the greater number, who suffer themselves to be hurried along by the
epidemical vices with which they are infected: they are placed by it
upon the stream of corruption, and the tide either sweeps them away,
or else, swelling the waters, breaks through its feeble mounds, and
involves the whole in one undistinguished mass of ruin. It is in those
countries where superstition has the greatest power, that will always
be found the least morality. Virtue is incompatible with ignorance; it
cannot coalesce with superstition; it cannot exist with slavery: slaves
can only be kept in subordination by the fear of punishment; ignorant
children are for a moment intimidated by imaginary terrors. But freemen,
the children of truth, have no fears but of themselves; are neither to
be lulled into submission by visionary duties, nor coerced by fanciful
systems; they yield ready obedience to the evident demonstrations of
virtue; are the faithful, the invulnerable supporters of solid systems;
cling with ardour to the dictates of reason; form impenetrable
ramparts round their legitimate sovereigns; and fix their thrones on an
immoveable basis, unknown to the theologian; that cannot be touched with
unhallowed hands; whose duration will be commensurate with the existence
of time itself. To form freemen, however, to have virtuous citizens,
it is necessary to enlighten them; it is incumbent to exhibit truth to
them; it is imperative to reason with them; it is indispensable to make
them feel their interests; it is paramount to learn them to respect
themselves; they must be instructed to fear shame; they must be excited
to have a just idea of honour; they must be made familiar with the value
of virtue, they must be shewn substantive motives for following its
lessons. How can these happy effects ever be expected from the polluted
fountains of superstition, whose waters do nothing more than degrade
mankind? Or how are they to be obtained from the ponderous, bulky yoke
of tyranny, which proposes nothing more to itself, than to vanquish them
by dividing them; to keep them in the most abject condition by means of
lascivious vices, and the most detestable crimes?

The false idea, which so many persons have of the utility of
superstition, which they, at least, judge to be calculated to restrain
the licentiousness of the illiterate, arise from the fatal prejudice
that it is a useful error; that truth may be dangerous. This principle
has complete efficacy to eternize the sorrows of the earth: whoever
shall have the requisite courage to examine these things, will without
hesitation acknowledge, that all the miseries of the human race are to
be ascribed to his errors; that of these, superstitious error must he
the most prejudicial, from the importance which is usually attached to
it; from the haughtiness with which it inspires sovereigns; from the
worthless condition which it prescribes to subjects; from the phrenzy
which it excites among the vulgar. We shall, therefore, be obliged to
conclude, that the superstitious errors of man, rendered sacred by time,
are exactly those which for the permanent interest of mankind, for the
well-being of society, for the security of the monarch himself,
demand the most complete destruction; that it is principally to their
annihilation, the efforts of a sound philosophy ought to be directed. It
is not to be feared, that this attempt will produce either disorders or
revolutions: the more freedom shall accompany the voice of truth, the
more convincing it will appear; although the more simple it shall
be, the less it will influence men, who are only smitten with the
marvellous; even those individuals who most sedulously seek after truth,
who pursue it with the greatest ardour, have frequently an irresistible
inclination, that urges them on, and incessantly disposes them to
reconcile error with its antipode. That great master of the art of
thinking, who holds forth to his disciples such able advice, says, with
abundant reason, "that there is nothing but a good and solid philosophy,
which can, like another Hercules, exterminate those monsters called
popular errors: it is that alone which can give freedom to the human
mind."

Here is, unquestionably, the true reason why atheism, as it is called,
of which hitherto the principles have not been sufficiently developed,
appears to alarm even those persons who are the most destitute of
prejudice. They find the interval too great between vulgar superstition
and an absolute renunciation of it; they imagine they take a wise medium
in compounding with error; they therefore reject the consequences, while
they admit the principle; they preserve the shadow and throw away the
substance, without foreseeing that, sooner or later, it must, by its
obstetric art, usher into the world, one after another, the same
follies which now fill the heads of bewildered human beings, lost in
the labyrinths of incomprehensible systems. The major part of the
incredulous, the greater number of reformers, do no more than prune a
cankered tree, to whose root they dare not apply the axe; they do
not perceive that this tree will in the end produce the same fruit.
Theology, or superstition, will always be an heap of combustible matter:
brooded in the imagination of mankind, it will always finish by causing
the most terrible explosions. As long as the sacerdotal order shall have
the privilege of infecting youth--of habituating their minds to tremble
before unmeaning words--of alarming nations with the most terrific
systems, so long will fanaticism be master of the human mind; imposture
will, at its pleasure, cast the apple of discord among the members of
the state. The most simple error, perpetually fed, unceasingly modified,
continually exaggerated by the imagination of man, will by degrees
assume a collossal figure, sufficiently powerful to upset every
institution; amply competent to the overthrow of empires. Theism is a
system at which the human mind cannot make a long sojourn; founded upon
error, it will, sooner or later, degenerate into the most absurd, the
most dangerous superstition.

Many incredulous beings, many theists, are to be met with in those
countries where freedom of opinion reigns; that is to say, where the
civil power has known how to balance superstition. But, above all,
atheists as they are termed, will be found in those nations where,
superstition, backed by the sovereign authority, most enforces the
ponderosity of its yoke; most impresses the volume of its severity;
imprudently abuses its unlimited power. Indeed, when in these kind of
countries, science, talents, the seeds of reflection, are not entirely
stifled, the greater part of the men who think, revolt at the crying
abuses of superstition; are ashamed of its multifarious follies; are
shocked at the corruption of its professors; scandalized at the tyranny
of its priests: are struck with horror at those massive chains which
it imposes on the credulous. Believing with great reason, that they can
never remove themselves too far from its savage principles, the system
that serves for the basis of such a creed, becomes as odious as the
superstition itself; they feel that terrific systems can only be
detailed by cruel ministers; these become detestable objects to every
enlightened, to every honest mind, in which either the love of equity,
or the sacred fire of freedom resides; to every one who is the advocate
of humanity--the indignant spurner of tyranny. Oppression gives a spring
to the soul; it obliges man to examine closely into the cause of his
sorrows; misfortune is a powerful incentive, that turns the mind to
the side of truth. How formidable a foe must not outraged reason be to
falsehood? It at least throws it into confusion, when it tears away its
mask; when it follows it into its last entrenchment; when it proves,
beyond contradiction, that _nothing is so dastardly as delusion
detected, or tyrannic power held at bay._





CHAP. XIII.

_Of the motives which lead to what is falsely called Atheism.--Can this
System be dangerous?--Can it be embraced by the Illiterate?_


The reflections, as well as the facts which have preceded, will furnish
a reply to those who inquire what interest man has in not admitting
unintelligible systems? The tyrannies, the persecutions, the numberless
outrages committed under these systems; the stupidity, the slavery,
into which their ministers almost every where plunge the people; the
sanguinary disputes to which they give birth; the multitude of unhappy
beings with which their fatal notions fill the world; are surely
abundantly sufficient to create the most powerful, the most interesting
motives, to determine all sensible men, who possess the faculty of
thought, to examine into the authenticity of doctrines, which cause so
many serious evils to the inhabitants of the earth.

A theist, very estimable for his talents, asks, "if there can be any
other cause than an evil disposition, which can make men atheists?" I
reply to him, yes, there are other causes. There is the desire, a very
laudable one, of having a knowledge of interesting truths; there is the
powerful interest of knowing what opinions we ought to hold upon the
object which is announced to us as the most important; there is the fear
of deceiving ourselves upon systems which are occupied with the opinions
of mankind, which do not permit he should deceive himself respecting
them with impunity. But when these motives, these causes, should not
subsist, is not indignation, or if they will, an evil disposition, a
legitimate cause, a good and powerful motive, for closely examining the
pretensions, for searching into the rights of systems, in whose name so
many crimes are perpetrated? Can any man who feels, who thinks, who
has any elasticity in his soul, avoid being incensed against austere
theories, which are visibly the pretext, undeniably the source, of all
those evils, which on every side assail the human race? Are they not
these fatal systems which are at once the cause and the ostensible
reason of that iron yoke that oppresses mankind; of that wretched
slavery in which he lives; of that blindness which hides from him
his happiness; of that superstition, which disgraces him; of those
irrational customs which torment him; of those sanguinary quarrels which
divide him; of all the outrages which he experiences? Must not every
breast in which humanity is not extinguished, irritate itself against
that theoretical speculation, which in almost every country is made to
speak the language of capricious, inhuman, irrational tyrants?

To motives so natural, so substantive, we shall join those which are
still more urgent, more personal to every reflecting man: namely, that
benumbing terror, that incommodious fear, which must be unceasingly
nourished by the idea of capricious theories, which lay man open to the
most severe penalties, even for secret thoughts, over which he himself
has not any controul; that dreadful anxiety arising out of inexorable
systems, against which he may sin without even his own knowledge; of
morose doctrines, the measure of which he can never be certain of having
fulfilled; which so far from being equitable, make all the obligations
lay on one side; which with the most ample means of enforcing restraint,
freely permit evil, although they hold out the most excruciating
punishments for the delinquents? Does it not then, embrace the best
interests of humanity, become of the highest importance to the welfare
of mankind, of the greatest consequence to the quiet of his existence,
to verify the correctness of these systems? Can any thing be more
rational than to probe to the core these astounding theories? Is it
possible that any thing can be more just, than to inquire rigorously
into the rights, sedulously to examine the foundations, to try by
every known test, the stability of doctrines, that involve in their
operations, consequences of such colossal magnitude; that embrace, in
their dictatory mandates, matters of such high behest; that implicate
the eternal felicity of such countless millions in the vortex of their
action? Would it not be the height of folly to wear such a tremendous
yoke without inquiry; to let such overwhelming notions pass current
unauthenticated; to permit the soi-disant ministers of these terrific
systems to establish their power, without the most ample verification
of their patents of mission? Would it, I repeat, be at all wonderful, if
the frightful qualities of some of these systems, as exhibited by
their official expounders, whom the accredited functionaries of similar
systems, do not scruple, in the face of day, to brand as impostors,
should induce rational beings to drive them entirely from their hearts;
to shake off such an intolerable burden of misery; to even deny the
existence of such appalling doctrines, of such petrifying systems,
which the superstitious themselves, whilst paying them their homage,
frequently curse from the very bottom of their hearts?

The theist, however, will not fail to tell the atheist, as he calls him,
that these systems are not such as superstition paints them; that the
colours are coarse, too glaring, ill assorted, the perspective out of
all keeping; he will then exhibit his own picture, in which the tints
are certainly blended with more mellowness, the colouring of a more
pleasing hue, the whole more harmonious, but the distances equally
indistinct: the atheist, in reply, will say, that superstition itself,
with all the absurd prejudices, all the mischievous notions to which it
gives birth, are only corollaries drawn from the fallacious ideas, from
those obscure principles, which the deicolist himself indulges. That his
own incomprehensible system authorizes the incomprehensible absurdities,
the inconceivable mysteries, with which superstition abounds; that they
flow consecutively from his own premises; that when once the mind of
mortals is bewildered in the dark, inextricable mazes of an ill-directed
imagination, it will incessantly multiply its chimeras. To assure the
repose of mankind, fundamental errors must be annihilated; that he may
understand his true relations, be acquainted with his imperative duties,
primary delusions must be rectified; to procure him that serenity of
soul, without which there can be no substantive happiness, original
fallacies must be undermined. If the systems of the superstitious
be revolting, if their theories be gloomy, if their dogmas are
unintelligible, those of the theist will always be contradictory; will
prove fatal, when he shall be disposed to meditate upon them; will
become the source of illusions, with which, sooner or later, imposture
will not omit to abuse his credulity. Nature alone, with the truths she
discovers, is capable of lending to the human mind that firmness
which falsehood will never be able to shake; to the human heart that
self-possession, against which imposture will in vain direct its
attacks.

Let us again reply to those who unceasingly repeat that the interest of
the passions alone conduct man to what is termed atheism: that it is the
dread of future punishment that determines corrupt individuals to make
the most strenuous efforts to break up a system they have reason to
dread. We shall, without hesitation, agree that it is the interest of
man's passions which excites him to make inquiries; without interest,
no man is tempted to seek; without passion, no man will seek vigorously.
The question, then, to be examined, is, if the passions and interests,
which determine some thinkers to dive into the stability or the systems
held forth to their adoption, are or are not legitimate? These interests
have, already been exposed, from which it has been proved, that every
rational man finds in his inquietudes, in his fears, reasonable motives
to ascertain, whether or not it be necessary to pass his life in
perpetual dread; in never ceasing agonies? Will it be said, that an
unhappy being, unjustly condemned to groan in chains, has not the right
of being willing to render them asunder; to take some means to liberate
himself from his prison; to adopt some plan to escape from those
punishments, which every instant threaten him? Will it be pretended that
his passion for liberty has no legitimate foundation, that he does an
injury to the companions of his misery, in withdrawing himself from the
shafts of tyrannical infliction; or in furnishing, them also with means
to escape from its cruel strokes? Is, then, an incredulous man, any
thing more than one who has taken flight from the general prison,
in which despotic superstition detains nearly all mankind? Is not an
atheist, as he is called, who writes, one who has broken his fetters,
who supplies to those of his associates who have sufficient courage to
follow him, the means of setting themselves free from the terrors that
menace them? The priests unceasingly repeat that it is pride, vanity,
the desire of distinguishing himself from the generality of mankind,
that determines man to incredulity. In this they are like some of those
wealthy mortals, who treat all those as insolent who refuse to cringe
before them. Would not every rational man have a right to ask the
priest, where is thy superiority in matters of reasoning? What motives
can I have to submit my reason to thy delirium? On the other hand, way
it not be said to the hierarchy, that it is interest which makes them
priests; that it is interest which renders them theologians; that it is
for the interest of their passions, to inflate their pride, to gratify
their avarice, to minister to their ambition, &c. that they attach
themselves to systems, of which they alone reap the benefits? Whatever
it may be, the priesthood, contented with exercising their power over
the illiterate, ought to permit those men who do think, to be excused
from bending the knee before their vain, illusive idols.

We also agree, that frequently the corruption of morals, a life of
debauchery, a licentiousness of conduct, even levity of mind, may
conduct man to incredulity; but is it not possible to be a libertine, to
be irreligious, to make a parade of incredulity, without being on that
account an atheist? There is unquestionably a difference between those
who are led to renounce belief in unintelligible systems by dint of
reasoning, and those who reject or despise superstition, only because
they look upon it as a melancholy object, or an incommodious restraint.
Many persons, no doubt, renounce received prejudices, through vanity or
upon hearsay; these pretended strong minds have not examined any thing
for themselves; they act upon the authority of others, whom they suppose
to have weighed things more maturely. This kind of incredulous beings,
have not, then, any distinct ideas, any substantive opinions, and are
but little capacitated to reason for themselves; they are indeed hardly
in a state to follow the reasoning of others. They are irreligious in
the same manner as the majority of mankind are superstitious, that is to
say, by credulity like the people; or through interest like the
priest. A voluptuary devoted to his appetites; a debauche drowned
in drunkenness; an ambitious mortal given up to his own schemes of
aggrandizement; an intriguer surrounded by his plots; a frivolous,
dissipated mortal, absorbed by his gewgaws, addicted to his puerile
pursuits, buried in his filthy enjoyments; a loose woman abandoned to
her irregular desires; a choice spirit of the day: are these I say,
personages, actually competent to form a sound judgment of superstition,
which they have never examined? Are they in a condition to maturely
weigh theories that require the utmost depth of thought? Have they the
capabilities to feel the force of a subtle argument; to compass the
whole of a system: to embrace the various ramifications of an extended
doctrine? If some feeble scintillations occasionally break in upon the
cimmerian darkness of their minds; if by any accident they discover
some faint glimmerings of truth amidst the tumult of their passions; if
occasionally a sudden calm, suspending, for a short season, the tempest
of their contending vices, permits the bandeau of their unruly desires
by which they are blinded, to drop for an instant from their hoodwinked
eyes, these leave on them only evanescent traces; scarcely sooner
received than obliterated. Corrupt men only attack the gods when they
conceive them to be the enemies to their vile passions. Arrian says,
"that when men imagine the gods are in opposition to their passions,
they abuse them, and overturn their altars." The Chinese, I believe, do
the same. The honest man makes war against systems which he finds are
inimical to virtue--injurious to his own happiness--baneful to that of
his fellow mortals--contradictory to the repose, fatal to the interests
of the human species. The bolder, therefore, the sentiments of the
honest atheist, the more strange his ideas, the more suspicious they
appear to other men, the more strictly he ought to observe his own
obligations; the more scrupulously he should perform his duties;
especially if he be not desirous that his morals shall calumniate his
system; which duly weighed, will make the necessity of sound ethics, the
certitude of morality, felt in all its force; but which every species of
superstition tends to render problematical, or to corrupt.

Whenever our will is moved by concealed and complicated motives, it is
extremely difficult to decide what determines it; a wicked man may be
conducted to incredulity or to scepticism by those motives which he dare
not avow, even to himself; in believing he seeks after truth, he
may form an illusion to his mind, only to follow the interest of his
passions; the fear of an avenging system will perhaps determine him to
deny their existence without examination; uniformly because he feels
them incommodious. Nevertheless, the passions sometimes happen to be
just; a great interest carries us on to examine things more minutely;
it may frequently make a discovery of the truth, even to him who seeks
after it the least, or who is only desirous to be lulled to sleep, who
is only solicitous to deceive himself. It is the same with a perverse
man who stumbles upon truth, as it is with him, who flying from an
imaginary danger, should encounter in his road a dangerous serpent,
which in his haste he should destroy; he does that by accident, without
design, which a man, less disturbed in his mind, would have done with
premeditated deliberation.

To judge properly of things, it is necessary to be disinterested; it
is requisite to have an enlightened mind, to have connected ideas to
compass a great system. It belongs, in fact, only to the honest man
to examine the proofs of systems--to scrutinize the principles of
superstition; it belongs only to the man acquainted with nature,
conversant with her ways, to embrace with intelligence the cause of the
SYSTEM OF NATURE. The wicked are incapable of judging with temper;
the ignorant are inadequate to reason with accuracy; the honest, the
virtuous, are alone competent judges in so weighty an affair. What do
I say? Is not the virtuous man, from thence in a condition to ardently
desire the existence of a system that remunerates the goodness of men?
If he renounces those advantages, which his virtue confers upon him
the right to hope, it is, undoubtedly, because he finds them imaginary.
Indeed, every man who reflects will quickly perceive, that for one timid
mortal, of whom these systems restrain the feeble passions, there are
millions whose voice they cannot curb, of whom, on the contrary, they
excite the fury; for one that they console, there are millions whom they
affright, whom they afflict; whom they make unhappy: in short, he finds,
that against one inconsistent enthusiast, which these systems, which
are thought so excellent, render happy, they carry discord, carnage,
wretchedness into vast countries; plunge whole nations into misery;
deluge them with tears.

However this may be, do not let us inquire into motives which may
determine a man to embrace a system; let us rather examine the system
itself; let us convince ourselves of its rectitude; if we shall find
that it is founded upon truth, we shall never, be able to esteem it
dangerous. It is always falsehood that is injurious to man; if error be
visibly the source of his sorrows, reason is the true remedy for them;
this is the panacea that can alone carry consolation to his afflictions.
Do not let us farther examine the conduct of a man who presents us with
a system; his ideas, as we have already said, may be extremely sound,
when even his actions are highly deserving of censure. If the system of
atheism cannot make him perverse, who is not so by his temperament, it
cannot render him good, who does not otherwise know the motives
that should conduct him to virtue. At least we have proved, that the
superstitious man, when he has strong passions, when he possesses a
depraved heart, finds even in his creed a thousand pretexts more than
the atheist, for injuring the human species. The atheist has not, at
least, the mantle of zeal to cover his vengeance; he has not the command
of his priest to palliate his transports; he has not the glory of his
gods to countenance his fury; the atheist does not enjoy the faculty of
expiating, at the expence of a sum of money, the transgressions of his
life; of availing himself of certain ceremonies, by the aid of which he
may atone for the outrages he may have committed against society; he
has not the advantage of being able to reconcile himself with heaven, by
some easy custom; to quiet the remorse of his disturbed conscience, by
an attention to outward forms: if crime has not deadened every feeling
of his heart, he is obliged continually to carry within himself an
inexorable judge, who unceasingly reproaches him for his odious conduct;
who forces him to blush for his own folly; who compels him to hate
himself; who imperiously obliges him to fear examination, to dread the
resentment of others. The superstitious man, if he be wicked, gives
himself up to crime, which is followed by remorse; but his superstition
quickly furnishes him with the means a getting rid of it; his life is
generally no more than a long series of error and grief, of sin and
expiation, following each other in alternate succession; still more, he
frequently, as we have seen, perpetrates crimes of greater magnitude,
in order to wash away the first. Destitute of any permanent ideas on
morality, he accustoms himself to look upon nothing as criminal, but
that which the ministers, the official expounders of his system, forbid
him to commit: he considers actions of the blackest dye as virtues, or
as the means of effacing those transgressions, which are frequently held
out to him as faithfully executing the duties of his creed. It is thus
we have seen fanatics expiate their adulteries by the most atrocious
persecutions; cleanse their souls from infamy by the most unrelenting
cruelty; make atonement for unjust wars by the foulest means; qualify
their usurpations by outraging every principle of virtue; in order
to wash away their iniquities, bathe themselves in the blood of those
superstitious victims, whose infatuation made them martyrs.

An atheist, as he is falsely called, if he has reasoned justly, if he
has consulted nature, hath principles more determinate, more humane,
than the superstitious; his system, whether gloomy or enthusiastic,
always conducts the latter either to folly or cruelty; the imagination
of the former will never be intoxicated to that degree, to make him
believe that violence, injustice, persecution, or assassination
are either virtuous or legitimate actions. We every day see that
superstition, or the cause of heaven, as it is called, hoodwinks even
those persons who on every other occasion are humane, equitable, and
rational; so much so, that they make it a paramount duty to treat with
determined barbarity, those men who happen to step aside from their mode
of thinking. An heretic, an incredulous being, ceases to be a man, in
the eyes of the superstitious. Every society, infected with the venom of
bigotry, offers innumerable examples of juridical assassination, which
the tribunals commit without scruple, even without remorse. Judges who
are equitable on every other occasion, are no longer so when there is a
question of theological opinions; in steeping their hands in the blood
of their victims, they believe, on the authority of the priests, they
conform themselves to the views of the Divinity. Almost every where the
laws are subordinate to superstition; make themselves accomplices in its
fanatical fury; they legitimate those actions most opposed to the gentle
voice of humanity; they even transform into imperative duties, the most
barbarous cruelties. The president Grammont relates, with a satisfaction
truly worthy of a cannibal, the particulars of the punishment of Vanini,
who was burned at Thoulouse, although he had disavowed the opinions with
which he was accused; this president carries his demoniac prejudices
so far, as to find wickedness in the piercing cries, in the
dreadful howlings, which torment wrested from this unhappy victim
to superstitious vengeance. Are not all these avengers of the gods
miserable men, blinded by their piety, who, under the impression of
duty, wantonly immolate at the shrine of superstition, those wretched
victims whom the priests deliver over to them? Are they not savage
tyrants, who have the rank injustice to violate thought; who have the
folly to believe they can enslave it? Are they not delirious fanatics,
on whom the law, dictated by the most inhuman prejudices, imposes the
necessity of acting like ferocious brutes? Are not all those sovereigns,
who to gratify the vanity of the priesthood, torment and persecute their
subjects, who sacrifice to their anthropophagite gods human victims,
men whom superstitious zeal has converted into tygers? Are not those
priests, so careful of the soul's health, who insolently break into the
sacred sanctuary of man's mind, to the end that they may find in his
opinions motives for doing him an injury, abominable knaves, disturbers
of the public repose, whom superstition honours, but whom virtue
detests? What villains are more odious in the eyes of humanity, what
depredators more hateful to the eye of reason, than those infamous
inquisitors, who by the blindness of princes, by the delirium of
monarchs, enjoy the advantage of passing judgment on their own enemies;
who ruthlessly commit them to the charity of the flames? Nevertheless,
the fatuity of the people makes even these monsters respected; the
favour of kings covers them with kindness; the mantle of superstitious
opinion shields them from the effect of the just execration of every
honest man. Do not a thousand examples prove, that superstition has
every where produced the most frightful ravages: that it has continually
justified the most unaccountable horrors? Has it not a thousand times
armed its votaries with the dagger of the homicide; let loose passions
much wore terrible than those which it pretended to restrain; broken up
the most sacred bonds by which mortals are connected with each other?
Has it not, under the pretext of duty, under the colour of faith,
under the semblance of zeal, under the sacred name of piety, favoured
cupidity, lent wings to ambition, countenanced cruelty, given a spring
to tyranny? Has it not legitimatized murder; given a system to perfidy;
organized rebellion; made a virtue of regicide? Have not those princes
who have been foremost as the avengers of heaven, who have been the
lictors of superstition, frequently themselves become its victims? In
short, has it not been the signal for the most dismal follies, the most
wicked outrages, the most horrible massacres? Has not its altars been
drenched with human gore? Under whatever form it has been exhibited,
has it not always been the ostensible cause of the most bare-faced
violation--of the sacred rights of humanity?

Never will an atheist, as he is called, as called, as he enjoys his
proper senses, persuade himself that similar actions can be justifiable;
never will he believe that he who commits them can be an estimable man;
there is no one but the superstitious, whose blindness makes him forget
the most evident principles of morality, whose callous soul renders
him deaf to the voice of nature, whose zeal causes him to overlook
the dictates of reason, who can by any possibility imagine the most
destructive crimes are the most prominent features of virtue. If the
atheist be perverse, he, at least, knows that he acts wrong; neither
these systems, nor their priests, will be able to persuade him that he
does right: one thing, however, is certain, whatever crimes he may allow
himself to commit, he will never be capable of exceeding those which
superstition perpetrates without scruple; that it encourages in those
whom it intoxicates with its fury; to whom it frequently holds forth
wickedness itself, either as expiations for offences, or else as
orthodox, meritorious actions.

Thus the atheist, however wicked he may be supposed, will at most be
upon a level with the devotee, whose superstition encourages him to
commit crimes, which it transforms into virtue. As to conduct, if he
be debauched, voluptuous, intemperate, adulterous, the atheist in
this differs in nothing from the most credulously superstitious, who
frequently knows how to connect these vices with his credulity, to
blend with his superstition certain atrocities, for which his priests,
provided he renders due homage to their power, especially if he augments
their exchequer, will always find means to pardon him. If he be in
Hindoostan, his brahmins will wash him in the sacred waters of the
Ganges, while reciting a prayer. If he be a Jew, upon making an
offering, his sins will be effaced. If he be in Japan, he will be
cleansed by performing a pilgrimage. If he be a Mahometan, he will be
reputed a saint, for having visited the tomb of his prophet; the Roman
pontiff himself will sell him indulgences; but none of them will ever
censure him for those crimes he may have committed in the support of
their several faiths.

We are constantly told, that the indecent behaviour of the official
expounders of superstition, the criminal conduct of the priests, or of
their sectaries, proves nothing against the goodness of their systems.
Admitted: but wherefore do they not say the same thing of the conduct of
those whom they call atheists, who, as we have already proved, way
have a very substantive, a very correct system of morality, even while
leading a very dissolute life? If it be necessary to judge the opinions
of mankind according to their conduct, which is the theory that would
bear the scrutiny? Let us, then, examine the opinion of the atheist,
without approving his conduct; let us adopt his mode of thinking, if we
find it marked by the truth; if it shall appear useful; if it shall be
proved rational; but let us reject his mode of action, if that should be
found blameable. At the sight of a work performed with truth, we do not
embarrass ourselves with the morals of the workman: of what importance
is it to the universe, whether the illustrious Newton was a sober,
discreet citizen, or a debauched intemperate man? It only remains for us
to examine his theory; we want nothing more than to know whether he
has reasoned acutely; if his principles be steady; if the parts of his
system are connected; if his work contains more demonstrable truths,
than bold ideas? Let us judge in the same manner of the principles of
the atheist; if they appear strange, if they are unusual, that is a
solid reason for probing them more strictly; if he has spoken truth,
if he has demonstrated his positions, let us yield to the weight of
evidence; if he be deceived in some parts, let us distinguish the true
from the false; but do not let us fall into the hacknied prejudice,
which on account of one error in the detail, rejects a multitude of
incontestible truisms. Doctor Johnson, I think, says in his preface to
his Dictionary, "when a man shall have executed his task with all the
accuracy possible, he will only be allowed to have done his duty; but if
he commits the slightest error, a thousand snarlers are ready to point
it out." The atheist, when he is deceived, has unquestionably as
much right to throw his faults on the fragility of his nature, as the
superstitious man. An atheist may have vices, may be defective, he
may reason badly; but his errors will never have the consequences of
superstitious novelties; they will not, like these, kindle up the fire
of discord in the bosom of nations; the atheist will not justify his
vices, defend his wanderings by superstition; he will not pretend to
infallibility, like those self-conceited theologians who attach the
Divine sanction to their follies; who initiate that heaven authorizes
those sophisms, gives currency to those falsehoods, approves those
errors, which they believe themselves warranted to distribute over the
face of the earth.

It will perhaps be said, that the refusal to believe in these systems,
will rend asunder one of the most powerful bonds of society, by making
the sacredness of an oath vanish. I reply, that perjury is by no means
rare, even in the most superstitious nations, nor even among the
most religious, or among those who boast of being the most thoroughly
convinced of the rectitude of their theories. Diagoras, superstitious as
he was, and it was not well possible to be more so, it is said became
an atheist, on seeing that the gods did not thunder their vengeance on
a man who had taken them as evidence to a falsity. Upon this principle,
how many atheists ought there to be? From the systems that have made
invisible unknown beings the depositaries of man's engagements, we do
not always see it result that they are better observed; or that the
most solemn contracts have acquired a greater solidity. If history
was consulted, it would now and then be in evidence, that even the
conductors of nations, those who have said they were the images of the
Divinity, who have declared that they held their right of governing
immediately from his hands, have sometimes taken the Deity as the
witness to their oaths, have made him the guarantee of their treaties,
without its having had all the effect that might have been expected,
when very trifling interests have intervened; it would appear, unless
historians are incorrect, that they did not always religiously observe
those sacred engagements they made with their allies, much less with
their subjects. To form a judgment from these historic documents,
we should be inclined to say, there have been those who had much
superstition, joined with very little probity; who made a mockery
both of gods and men; who perhaps blushed when they reviewed their own
conduct: nor can this be at all surprising, when it not unfrequently
happened that superstition itself absolved them from their oaths. In
fact, does not superstition sometimes inculcate perfidy; prescribe
violation of plighted faith? Above all, when there is a question of its
own interests, does it not dispense with engagements, however solemn,
made with those whom it condemns? It is, I believe, a maxim in the
Romish church, that _"no faith is to be held with heretics."_ The
general council of Constance decided thus, when, notwithstanding the
emperor's passport, it decreed John Hus and Jerome of Prague to be
burnt. The Roman pontiff has, it is well known, the right of relieving
his sectaries from their oaths; of annulling their vows: this same
pontiff has frequently arrogated to himself the right of deposing kings;
of absolving their subjects from their oaths of fidelity. Indeed, it
is rather extraordinary that oaths should be prescribed, by the laws
of those nations which profess Christianity, seeing that Christ
has expressly forbidden the use of them. If things were considered
attentively, it would be obvious that under such management,
superstition and politics are schools of perjury. They render it common:
thus knaves of every description never recoil, when it is necessary to
attest the name of the Divinity to the most manifest frauds, for the
vilest interests. What end, then, do oaths answer? They are snares, in
which simplicity alone can suffer itself to be caught: oaths, almost
every where, are vain formalities, that impose nothing upon villains;
nor do they add any thing to the sacredness of the engagements of honest
men; who would neither have the temerity nor the wish to violate them;
who would not think themselves less bound without an oath. A perfidious,
perjured, superstitious being, has not any advantage over an atheist,
who should fail in his promises: neither the one nor the other any
longer deserves the confidence of their fellow citizens nor the esteem
of good men; if one does not respect his gods, in whom he believes, the
other neither respects his reason, his reputation, nor public opinion,
in which all rational men cannot refuse to believe. Hobbes says, "an
oath adds nothing to the obligation. For a covenant, if lawful, binds
in the sight of God, without the oath, as much as with it: if unlawful,
bindeth not at all: though it be confirmed with an oath." The heathen
form was, "let Jupiter kill me else, as I kill this beast." Adjuration
only augments, in the imagination of him who swears, the fear of
violating an engagement, which he would have been obliged to keep, even
without the ceremony of an oath.

It has frequently been asked, if there ever was a nation that had no
idea of the Divinity: and if a people, uniformly composed of atheists,
would be able to subsist? Whatever some speculators may say, it does not
appear likely that there ever has been upon our globe, a numerous people
who have not had an idea of some invisible power, to whom they have
shewn marks of respect and submission: it has been sometimes believed
that the Chinese were atheists: but this is an error, due to the
Christian missionaries, who are accustomed to treat all those as
atheists, who do not hold opinions similar with their own upon Divinity.
It always appears that the Chinese are a people extremely addicted
to superstition, but that they are governed by chiefs who are not so,
without however their being atheists for that reason. If the empire of
China be as flourishing as it is said to be, it at least furnishes
a very forcible proof that those who govern have no occasion to be
themselves superstitious, in order to govern with propriety a people
who are so. It is pretended that the Greenlanders have no idea of the
Divinity. Nevertheless, it is difficult to believe it of a nation so
savage. Man, inasmuch as he is a fearful, ignorant animal, necessarily
becomes superstitious in his misfortunes: either he forms gods for
himself, or he admits the gods which others are disposed to give him;
it does not then appear, that we can rationally suppose there may have
been, or that there actually is, a people on the earth a total stranger
to some Divinity. One will shew us the sun, the moon, or the stars; the
other will shew us the sea, the lakes, the rivers, which furnish him his
subsistence, the trees which afford him an asylum against the inclemency
of the weather; another will shew us a rock of an odd form; a lofty
mountain; or a volcano that frequently astonishes him by its emission
of lava; another will present you with his crocodile, whose malignity
he fears; his dangerous serpent, the reptile to which he attributes his
good or bad fortune. In short, each individual will make you behold his
phantasm or his tutelary or domestic gods with respect.

But from the existence of his gods, the savage does not draw the same
inductions as the civilized, polished man: the savage does not believe
it a duty to reason continually upon their qualities; he does not
imagine that they ought to influence his morals, nor entirely occupy his
thoughts: content with a gross, simple, exterior worship, he does not
believe that these invisible powers trouble themselves with his conduct
towards his fellow creatures; in short, he does not connect his morality
with his superstition. This morality is coarse, as must be that of all
ignorant people; it is proportioned to his wants, which are few; it
is frequently irrational, because it is the fruit of ignorance; of
inexperience; of the passions of men but slightly restrained, or to
say thus, in their infancy. It is only numerous, stationary, civilized
societies, where man's wants are multiplied, where his interests clash,
that he is obliged to have recourse to government, to laws, to
public worship, in order to maintain concord. It is then, that men
approximating, reason together, combine their ideas, refine their
notions, subtilize their theories; it is then also, that those who
govern them avail themselves of invisible powers, to keep them within
bounds, to render them docile, to enforce their obedience, to oblige
them to live peaceably. It was thus, that by degrees, morals and
politics found themselves associated with superstitious systems. The
chiefs of nations, frequently, themselves, the children of superstition,
but little enlightened upon their actual interests; slenderly versed
in sound morality; with an extreme exilty of knowledge on the actuating
motives of the human heart; believed they had effected every thing
requisite for the stability of their own authority; as well as achieved
all that could guarantee the repose of society, that could consolidate
the happiness of the people, in rendering their subjects superstitious
like themselves; by menacing them with the wrath of invisible powers; in
treating them like infants who are appeased with fables, like children
who are terrified by shadows. By the assistance of these marvellous
inventions, to which even the chiefs, the conductors of nations, are
themselves frequently the dupes; which are transmitted as heirlooms from
race to race; sovereigns were dispensed from the trouble of instructing
themselves in their duties; they in consequence neglected the laws,
enervated themselves in luxurious ease, rusted in sloth; followed
nothing but their caprice: the care of restraining their subjects was
reposed in their deities; the instruction of the people was confided to
their priests, who were commissioned to train them to obedience, to make
them submissive, to render them devout, to teach them at an early age to
tremble under the yoke of both the visible and invisible gods.

It was thus that nations, kept by their tutors in a perpetual state of
infancy, were only restrained by vain, chimerical theories. It was thus
that politics, jurisprudence, education, morality, were almost every
where infected with superstition; that man no longer knew any duties,
save those which grew out of its precepts: the ideas of virtue were thus
falsely associated with those of imaginary systems, to which imposture
generally gave that language which was most conducive to its own
immediate interests: mankind thus fully persuaded, that without these
marvellous systems, there could not exist any sound morality, princes,
as well as subjects, equally blind to their actual interests, to the
duties of nature, to their reciprocal rights, habituated themselves
to consider superstition as necessary to mortals--as indispensibly
requisite to govern men--as the most effectual method of preserving
power--as the most certain means of attaining happiness.

It is from these dispositions, of which we have so frequently
demonstrated the fallacy, that so many persons, otherwise extremely
enlightened, look upon it as an impossibility that a society formed of
atheists, as they are termed, could subsist for any length of time. It
does not admit a question, that a numerous society, who should neither
have religion, morality, government, laws, education, nor principles,
could not maintain itself; that it would simply congregate beings
disposed to injure each other, or children who would follow nothing but
the blindest impulse; but then is it not a lamentable fact, that with
all the superstition that floats in the world, the greater number of
human societies are nearly in this state? Are not the sovereigns
of almost every country in a continual state of warfare with their
subjects? Are not the people, in despite of their superstition, not
withstanding the terrific notions which it holds forth, unceasingly
occupied with reciprocally injuring each other; with rendering
themselves mutually unhappy? Does not superstition itself, with its
supernatural notions, unremittingly flatter the vanity of monarchs,
unbridle the passions of princes, throw oil into the fire of discord,
which it kindles between those citizens who are divided in their
opinion? Could those infernal powers, who are supposed to be ever on the
alert to mischief mankind, be capable of inflicting greater evils upon
the human race than spring from fanaticism, than arise out of the fury
to which theology gives birth? Could atheists, however irrational they
may be supposed, if assembled together in society, conduct themselves
in a more criminal manner? In short, is it possible they could act worse
than the superstitious, who, saturated with the most pernicious vices,
guided by the most extravagant systems, during so many successive ages,
have done nothing more than torment themselves with the most cruel
inflictions; savagely cut each other's throats, without a shadow of
reason; make a merit of mutual extermination? It cannot be pretended
they would. On the contrary, we boldly assert, that a community of
atheists, as the theologian calls them, because they cannot fall in
with his mysteries, destitute of all superstition, governed by wholesome
laws, formed by a salutary education, invited to the practice of
virtue by instantaneous recompences, deterred from crime by immediate
punishments, disentangled from illusive theories, unsophisticated by
falsehood, would be decidedly more honest, incalculably more virtuous,
than those superstitious societies, in which every thing contributes to
intoxicate the mind; where every thing conspires to corrupt the heart.

When we shall be disposed usefully to occupy ourselves with the
happiness of mankind, it is with superstition that the reform must
commence; it is by abstracting these imaginary theories, destined to
affright the ignorant, who are completely in a state of infancy, that we
shall be able to promise ourselves the desirable harvest of conducting
man to a state of maturity. It cannot be too often repeated, there can
be no morality without consulting the nature of man, without studying
his actual relations with the beings of his own species; there can be
no fixed principle for man's conduct, while it is regulated upon unjust
theories; upon capricious doctrines; upon corrupt systems; there can
be no sound politics without attending to human temperament, without
contemplating him as a being associated for the purpose of satisfying
his wants, consolidating his happiness, and assuring its enjoyment. No
wise government can found itself upon despotic systems; they will always
make tyrants of their representatives. No laws can be wholesome, that
do not bottom themselves upon the strictest equity; which have not for
their object the great end of human society. No jurisprudence can
be advantageous for nations, if its administration be regulated by
capricious systems, or by human passions deified. No education can be
salutary, unless it be founded upon reason; to be efficacious to its
proposed end, it must neither be construed upon chimerical theories, nor
upon received prejudices. In short, there can be no probity, no talents,
no virtue, either under corrupt masters, or under the conduct of those
priests who render man the enemy to himself--the determined foe
to others; who seek to stifle in his bosom the germ of reason; who
endeavour to smother science, or who try to damp his courage.

It will, perhaps, be asked, if we can reasonably flatter ourselves with
ever reaching the point to make a whole people entirely forget their
superstitious opinions; or abandon the ideas which they have of their
gods? I reply, that the thing appears utterly impossible; that this is
not the end we can propose to ourselves. These ideas, inculcated from
the earliest ages, do not appear of a nature to admit eradication
from the mind of the majority of mankind: it would, perhaps be equally
arduous to give them to those persons, who, arrived at a certain time of
life, should never have heard them spoken of, as to banish them from
the minds of those, who have been imbued with them from their tenderest
infancy. Thus, it cannot be reckoned possible to make a whole nation
pass from the abyss of superstition, that is to say, from the bosom of
ignorance, from the ravings of delirium, into absolute naturalism, or
as the priests of superstition would denominate it, into atheism;
which supposes reflection--requires intense study--demands extensive
knowledge--exacts a long series of experience--includes the habit of
contemplating nature--the faculty of observing her laws; which, in
short, embraces the expansive science of the causes producing her
various phenomena; her multiplied combinations, together with the
diversified actions of the beings she contains, as well as their
numerous properties. In order to be an atheist, or to be assured of
the capabilities of nature, it is imperative to have meditated
her profoundly: a superficial glance of the eye will not bring man
acquainted with her resources; optics but little practised on her
powers, will unceasingly be deceived; the ignorance of actual causes
will always induce the supposition of those which are imaginary;
credulity will, thus re-conduct the natural philosopher himself to the
feet of superstitious phantoms, in which either his limited vision, or
his habitual sloth, will make him believe he shall find the solution to
every difficulty.

Atheism, then, as well as philosophy, like all profound abstruse
sciences, is not calculated for the vulgar; neither is it suitable
to the great mass of mankind. There are, in all populous, civilized
nations, persons whose circumstances enable them to devote their time
to meditation, whose easy finances afford them leisure to make deep
researches into the nature of things, who frequently make useful
discoveries, which, sooner or later, after they have been submitted
to the infallible test of experience, when they have passed the fiery
ordeal of truth, extend widely their salutary effects, become extremely
beneficial to society, highly advantageous to individuals. The
geometrician, the chemist, the mechanic, the natural philosopher, the
civilian, the artizan himself, are industriously employed, either
in their closets, or in their workshops, seeking the means to serve
society, each in his sphere: nevertheless, not one of their sciences
or professions are familiar to the illiterate; not one of the arts with
which they are respectively occupied, are known to the uninitiated:
these, however, do not fail, in the long run, to profit by them, to reap
substantive advantages from those labours, of which they themselves have
no idea. It is for the mariner, that the astronomer explores his arduous
science; it is for him the geometrician calculates; for his use the
mechanic plies his craft: it is for the mason, for the carpenter, for
the labourer, that the skilful architect studies his orders, lays down
well-proportioned elaborate plans. Whatever may be the pretended utility
of Pneumatology, whatever may be the vaunted advantages of superstitious
opinions, the wrangling polemic, the subtle theologian, cannot boast
either of toiling, of writing, or of disputing for the advantage of the
people, whom, notwithstanding, he contrives to tax, very exorbitantly,
for those systems they can never understand; from whom he levies the
most oppressive contributions, as a remuneration for the detail of those
mysteries, which under any possible circumstances, cannot, at any time
whatever, be of the slightest benefit to them. It is not, then, for the
multitude that a philosopher should propose to himself, either to write
or to meditate: the Code of Nature, or the principles of atheism, as
the priest calls it, are not, as we have shewn, even calculated for
the meridian of a great number of persons, who are frequently too much
prepossessed in favour of the received prejudices, although extremely
enlightened on other points. It is extremely rare to find men, who, to
an enlarged mind, extensive knowledge, great talents, join either a well
regulated imagination, or the courage necessary to successfully oppugn
habitual errors; triumphantly to attack those chimerical systems, with
which the brain has been inoculated from the first hour of its birth.
A secret bias, an invincible inclination, frequently, in despite of all
reasoning, re-conducts the most comprehensive, the best fortified, the
most liberal minds, to those prejudices which have a wide-spreading
establishment; of which they have themselves taken copious draughts
during the early stages of life. Nevertheless, those principles, which
at first appear strange, which by their boldness seem revolting, from
which timidity flies with trepidation, when they have the sanction
of truth, gradually insinuate themselves into the human mind, become
familiar to its exercise, extend their happy influence on every side,
and finally produce the most substantive advantages to society. In time,
men habituate themselves to ideas which originally they looked upon
as absurd; which on a superficial glance they contemplated as either
noxious or irrational: at least, they cease to consider those as odious,
who profess opinions upon subjects on which experience makes it evident
they may be permitted to have doubts, without imminent danger to public
tranquillity.

Then the diffusion of ideas among mankind is not an event to be dreaded:
if they are truths, they will of necessity be useful: by degrees they
will fructify. The man who writes, must neither fix his eyes upon the
time in which he lives, upon his actual fellow citizens, nor upon the
country he inhabits. He must speak to the human race; he must instruct
future generations; he must extend his views into the bosom of futurity;
in vain he will expect the eulogies of his contemporaries; in vain will
he flatter himself with seeing his reasoning adopted; in vain he
will soothe himself with the pleasing reflection, that his precocious
principles will be received with kindness; if he has exhibited truisms,
the ages that shall follow will do justice to his efforts; unborn
nations shall applaud his exertions; his future countrymen shall crown
his sturdy attempts with those laurels, which interested prejudice
withholds from him in his own days; it must therefore be from posterity,
he is to expect the need of applause due to his services; the present
race is hermetically sealed against him: meantime let him content
himself with having done well; with the secret suffrages of those few
friends to veracity who are so thinly spread over the surface of the
earth. It is after his death, that the trusty reasoner, the faithful
writer, the promulgator of sterling principles, the child of simplicity,
triumphs; it is then that the stings of hatred, the shafts of envy, the
arrows of malice, either exhausted or blunted, enable mankind to judge
with impartiality; to yield to conviction; to establish eternal truth
upon its own imperishable altars, which from its essence must survive
all the error of the earth. It is then that calumny, crushed like the
devouring snail by the careful gardener, ceases to besmear the character
of an honest man, while its venomous slime, glazed by the sun, enables
the observant spectator to trace the filthy progress it had made.

It is a problem with many people, _if truth may not be injurious?_
The best intentioned persons are frequently in great doubt upon this
important point. The fact is, _it never injures any but those who
deceive mankind_: this has, however, the greatest interest in being
undeceived. Truth may be injurious to the individual who announces it,
but it can never by any possibility harm the human species; never can it
be too distinctly presented to beings, always either little disposed to
listen to its dictates, or too slothful to comprehend its efficacy. If
all those who write to publish important truths, which, of all others,
are ever considered the most dangerous, were sufficiently ardent for the
public welfare to speak freely, even at the risk of displeasing their
readers, the human race would be much more enlightened, much happier
than it now is. To write in ambiguous terms, is very frequently to
write to nobody. The human mind is idle; we must spare it, as much
as possible, the trouble of reflection; we must relieve it from the
embarrassment of intense thinking. What time does it not consume,
what study does it not require, at the present day, to unravel the
amphibological oracles of the ancient philosophers, whose actual
sentiments are almost entirely lost to the present race of men? If truth
be useful to human beings, it is an injustice to deprive them of
its advantages; if truth ought to be admitted, we must admit its
consequences, which are also truths. Man, taken generally, is fond of
truth, but its consequences often inspire him with so much dread, so
alarm his imbecility, that, frequently, he prefers remaining in error,
of which a confirmed habit prevents him from feeling the deplorable
effects. Besides, we shall say with Hobbes, "that we cannot do men any
harm by proposing truth to them; the worst mode is to leave them in
doubt, to let them remain in dispute." If an author who writes be
deceived, it is because he may have reasoned badly. Has he laid down
false principles? It remains to examine them. Is his system fallacious?
Is it ridiculous? It will serve to make truth appear with the greatest
splendor: his work will fall into contempt; the writer, if he be witness
to its fall, will be sufficiently punished for his temerity; if he
be defunct, the living cannot disturb his ashes. No man writes with a
design to injure his fellow creatures; he always proposes to himself
to merit their suffrages, either by amusing them, by exciting their
curiosity, or by communicating to them discoveries, which he believes
useful. Above all, no work can be really dangerous, if it contains
truth. It would not be so, even if it contained principles evidently
contrary to experience--opposed to good sense. Indeed, what would
result from a work that should now tell us the sun is not luminous; that
parricide is legitimate; that robbery is allowable; that adultery is not
a crime? The smallest reflection would make us feet the falsity of these
principles; the whole human race would protest against them. Men would
laugh at the folly of the author; presently his book, together with his
name, would be known only by its ridiculous extravagancies. There is
nothing but superstitious follies that are pernicious to mortals; and
wherefore? It is because authority always pretends to establish them by
violence; to make them pass for substantive virtues; rigorously punishes
those who shall be disposed to smile at their inconsistency, or examine
into their pretensions. If man was more rational, he would examine
superstitious opinions as he examines every thing else; he would look
upon theological theories with the same eyes that he contemplates
systems of natural philosophy, or problems in geometry: the latter never
disturbs the repose of society, although they sometimes excite very
warm disputes in the learned world. Theological quarrels would never
be attended with any evil consequences, if man could gain the desirable
point of making those who exercise power, feel that the disputes of
persons, who do not themselves understand the marvellous questions upon
which they never cease wrangling, ought not to give birth to any other
sensations than those of indifference; to rouse no other passion than
that of contempt.

It is, at least, this indifference not speculative theories, so just, so
rational, so advantageous for states, that sound philosophy may propose
to introduce, gradually, upon the earth. Would not the human race be
much happier--if the sovereigns of the world, occupied with the welfare
of their subjects, leaving to superstitious theologians their futile
contests, making their various systems yield to healthy politics;
obliged these haughty ministers to become citizens; carefully prevented
their disputes from interrupting the public tranquillity? What advantage
might there not result to science; what a start would be given to the
progress of the human mind, to the cause of sound morality, to
the advancement of equitable jurisprudence, to the improvement of
legislation, to the diffusion of education, from an unlimited freedom
of thought? At present, genius every where finds trammels; superstition
invariably opposes itself to its course; man, straitened with bandages,
scarcely enjoys the free use of any one of his faculties; his mind
itself is cramped; it appears continually wrapped up in the swaddling
clothes of infancy. The civil power, leagued with spiritual domination,
appears only disposed to rule over brutalized slaves, shut up in a dark
prison, where they reciprocally goad each other with the efferverscence
of their mutual ill humour. Sovereigns, in general, detest liberty
of thought, because they fear truth; this appears formidable to them,
because it would condemn their excesses; these irregularities are dear
to them, because they do not, better than their subjects, understand
their true interests; properly considered, these ought to blend
themselves into one uniform mass.

Let not the courage of the philosopher, however, be abated by so many
united obstacles, which would appear for ever to exclude truth from its
proper dominion; to banish reason from the mind of man; to spoil nature
of her imprescriptible rights. The thousandth part of those cares which
are bestowed to infect the human mind, would be amply sufficient to make
it whole. Let us not, then, despair of the case: do not let us do man
the injury to believe that truth is not made for him; his mind seeks
after it incessantly; his heart desires it faithfully; his happiness
demands it with an imperious voice; he only either fears it, or mistakes
it, because superstition, which has thrown all his ideas into confusion,
perpetually keeps the bandeau of delusion fast bound over his eyes;
strives, with an almost irresistible force, to render him an entire
stranger to virtue.

Maugre the prodigious exertions that are made to drive truth from the
earth; in spite of the extraordinary pains used to exile reason--of
the uninterrupted efforts to expel true science from the residence of
mortals; time, assisted by the progressive knowledge of ages, may one
day be able to enlighten even those princes who are the most outrageous
in their opposition to the illumination of the human mind; who appear
such decided enemies to justice, so very determined against the
liberties of mankind. Destiny will, perhaps, when least expected,
conduct these wandering outcasts to the throne of some enlightened,
equitable, courageous, generous, benevolent sovereign, who, smitten with
the charms of virtue, shall throw aside duplicity, frankly acknowledge
the true source of human misery, and apply to it those remedies with
which wisdom has furnished him: perhaps he may feel, that those systems,
from whence it is pretended he derives his power, are the true scourges
of his people; the actual cause of his own weakness: that the official
expounders of these systems are his most substantial enemies--his most
formidable rivals; he may find that superstition, which he has been
taught to look upon as the main support to his authority, in point
of fact only enfeebles it--renders it tottering: that superstitious
morality, false in its principles, is only calculated to pervert his
subjects; to break down their intrepidity; to render them perfidious;
in short, to give them the vices of slaves, in lieu of the virtues
of citizens. A prince thus disentangled from prejudice, will perhaps
behold, in superstitious errors, the fruitful source of human sorrows,
and commiserations, the condition of his race, it may be, will
generously declare, that they are incompatible with every equitable
administration.

Until this epoch, so desirable for humanity, shall arrive, the
principles of naturalism will be adopted only by a small number of
liberal-minded men, who shall dive below the surface; these cannot
flatter themselves either with making proselytes, or having a great
number of approvers: on the contrary, they will meet with zealous
adversaries, with ardent contemners, even in those persons who upon
every other subject discover the most acute minds; display the most
consummate knowledge. Those men who possess the greatest share of
ability, as we have already observed, cannot always resolve to divorce
themselves completely from their superstitious ideas; imagination,
so necessary to splendid talents, frequently forms in them an
insurmountable obstacle to the total extinction of prejudice; this
depends much more upon the judgment than upon the mind. To this
disposition, already so prompt to form illusions to them, is also to
be joined the force of habit; to a great number of men, it would
he wresting from them a portion of themselves to take away their
superstitious notions; it would be depriving them of an accustomed
aliment; plunging them into a dreadful vacuum: obliging their
distempered minds to perish for want of exercise. Menage remarks, "that
history speaks of very few incredulous women, or female atheists:"
this is not surprising; their organization renders them fearful; their
nervous system undergoes periodical variations; the education they
receive disposes them to credulity. Those among them who have a sound
constitution, who have a well ordered imagination, have occasion for
chimeras suitable to occupy their leisure; above all, when the world
abandons them, then superstitious devotion, with its attractive
ceremonies, becomes either a business or an amusement.

Let us not be surprised, if very intelligent, extremely learned men,
either obstinately shut their eyes, or run counter to their ordinary
sagacity, every time there is a question respecting an object which they
have not the courage to examine with that attention they lend to many
others. Lord Chancellor Bacon pretends, "that a little philosophy
disposes men to atheism, but that great depth re-conducts them to
religion." If we analyze this proposition, we shall find it signifies,
that even moderate, indifferent thinkers, are quickly enabled to
perceive the gross absurdities of superstition; but that very little
accustomed to meditate, or else destitute of those fixed principles
which could serve them for a guide, their imagination presently replaces
them in the theological labyrinth, from whence reason, too weak for the
purpose, appeared disposed to withdraw them: these timid souls, who fear
to take courage, with minds disciplined to be satisfied with theological
solutions, no longer see in nature any thing but an inexplicable enigma;
an abyss which it is impossible for them to fathom: these, habituated to
fix their eyes upon an ideal, mathematical point, which they have made
the centre of every thing, whenever they lose sight of it, find the
universe becomes an unintelligible jumble to them; then the confusion in
which they feel themselves involved, makes them rather prefer returning
to the prejudices of their infancy, which appear to explain every thing,
than to float in the vacuum, or quit a foundation which they judge to
be immoveable. Thus the proposition of Bacon should seem, to indicate
nothing, except it be that the most experienced persons cannot at all
times defend themselves against the illusions of their imagination; the
impetuosity of which resists the strongest reasoning.

Nevertheless, a deliberate study of nature is sufficient to undeceive
every man who will calmly consider things: he will discover that the
phenomena of the world is connected by links, invisible to superficial
notice, equally concealed from the too impetuous observer, but extremely
intelligible to him who views her with serenity. He will find that the
most unusual, the most marvellous, as well as the most trifling, or
ordinary effects, are equally inexplicable, but that they all equally
flow from natural causes; that supernatural causes, under whatever name
they way be designated, with whatever qualities they may be decorated,
will never do more than increase difficulties; will only make chimeras
multiply. The simplest observation will incontestibly prove to him
that every thing is necessary; that all the effects he perceives are
material; that they can only originate in causes of the same nature,
when he even shall not be able to recur to them by the assistance of his
senses. Thus his mind, properly directed, every where show him nothing
but matter, sometimes acting in a manner which his organs permit him to
follow, at others in a mode imperceptible by the faculties he possesses:
he will see that all beings follow constant invariable laws, by which
all combinations are united and destroyed; he will find that all forms
change, but that, nevertheless, the great whole ever remains the same.
Thus, cured of the idle notions with which he was imbued, undeceived
in those erroneous ideas, which from habit be attached to imaginary
systems, he will cheerfully consent to be ignorant of whatever his
organs do not enable him to compass; he will know that obscure terms,
devoid of sense, are not calculated to explain difficulties; guided
by reason, he will throw aside all hypothesis of the imagination; the
champion of rectitude, he will attach himself to realities, which are
confirmed by experience, which are evidenced by truth.

The greater number of those who study nature, frequently do not
consider, that prejudiced eyes will never discover more than that which
they have previously determined to find: as soon as they perceive facts
contrary to their own ideas, they quickly turn aside, and believe their
visual organs have deceived them; if they return to the task, it is in
hopes to find means by which they may reconcile the facts to the
notions with which their own mind is previously tinctured. Thus we find
enthusiastic philosophers, whose determined prepossession shews them
what they denominate incontestible evidences of the systems with which
they are pre-occupied, even in those things, that most openly contradict
their hypothesis: hence those pretended demonstrations of the existence
of theories, which are drawn from final causes--from the order of
nature--from the kindness evinced to man, &c. Do these same enthusiasts
perceive disorder, witness calamities? They induct new proofs of the
wisdom, fresh evidence of the intelligence, additional testimony to
the bounty of their system, whilst all these occurrences as visibly
contradict these qualities, as the first seem to confirm or to establish
them. These prejudiced observers are in an ecstacy at the sight of the
periodical motions of the planets; at the order of the stars; at the
various productions of the earth; at the astonishing harmony in the
component parts of animals: in that moment, however, they forget the
laws of motion; the powers of gravitation; the force of attraction and
repulsion; they assign all these striking phenomena to unknown causes,
of which they have no one substantive idea. In short, in the fervor of
their imagination they place man in the centre of nature; they believe
him to be the object, the end, of all that exists; that it is for his
convenience every thing is made; that it is to rejoice his mind, to
pleasure his senses, that the whole was created; whilst they do not
perceive, that very frequently the entire of nature appears to be loosed
against his weakness; that the elements themselves overwhelm him with
calamity; that destiny obstinately persists in rendering him the most
miserable of beings. The progress of sound philosophy will always be
fatal to superstition, whose notions will be continually contradicted by
nature.

Astronomy has caused judiciary astrology to vanish; experimental
philosophy, the study of natural history and chemistry, have rendered
it impossible for jugglers, priests or sorcerers, any longer to perform
miracles. Nature, profoundly studied, must necessarily cause the
overthrow of those chimerical theories, which ignorance has substituted
to her powers.

Atheism, as it is termed, is only so rare, because every thing conspires
to intoxicate man with a dazzling enthusiasm, from his most tender age;
to inflate him from his earliest infancy, with systematic error, with
organized ignorance, which of all others is the most difficult to
vanquish, the most arduous to root out. Theology is nothing more than a
science of words, which by dint of repetition we accustom ourselves to
substitute for things: as soon as we feel disposed to analyze them, we
are astonished to find they do not present us with any actual sense.
There are, in the whole world, very few men who think deeply: who render
to themselves a faithful account of their own ideas; who have keen
penetrating minds. Justness of intellect is one of the rarest gifts
which nature bestows on the human species. It is not, however, to be
understood by this, that nature has any choice in the formation of
her beings; it is merely to be considered, that the circumstances very
rarely occur which enable the junction of a certain quantity of
those atoms or parts, necessary to form the human machine in such due
proportions, that one disposition shall not overbalance the others; and
thus render the judgment erroneous, by giving it a particular bias.
We know the general process of making gunpowder; nevertheless, it will
sometimes happen that the ingredients have been so happily blended, that
this destructive article is of a superior quality to the general produce
of the manufactory, without, however, the chemist being on that account
entitled to any particular commendation; circumstances have been
decidedly favorable, and these seldom occur. Too lively an imagination,
an over eager curiosity, are as powerful obstacles to the discovery of
truth, as too much phlegm, a slow conception, indolence of mind, or
the want of a thinking habit: all men have more or less imagination,
curiosity, phlegm, bile, indolence, activity: it is from the happy
equilibrium which nature has observed in their organization, that
depends that invaluable blessing, correctness of mind. Nevertheless,
as we have heretofore said, the organic structure of man is subject
to change; the accuracy of his mind varies with the mutations of his
machine: from hence may be traced those almost perpetual revolutions
that take place in the ideas of mortals; above all when there is a
question concerning those objects, upon which experience does not
furnish any fixed basis whereon to rest their merits.

To search after right, to discover truth, requires a keen, penetrating,
just, active mind; because every thing strives to conceal from us its
beauties: it needs an upright heart, one in good faith with itself,
joined to an imagination tempered with reason, because our habitual
fears make us frequently dread its radiance, sometimes bursting like a
meteor on our darkened faculties; besides, it not unfrequently happens,
that we are actually the accomplices of those who lead us astray, by an
inclination we too often manifest to dissimilate with ourselves on this
important measure. Truth never reveals itself either to the enthusiast
smitten with his own reveries; to the fellifluous fanatic enslaved
by his prejudices; to the vain glorious mortal puffed up with his own
presumptuous ignorance; to the voluptuary devoted to his pleasures; or
to the wily reasoner, who, disingenuous with himself, has a peculiar
spontaneity to form illusions to his mind. Blessed, however, with a
heart, gifted with a mind such as described, man will surely discover
this _rara avis:_ thus constituted, the attentive philosopher, the
geometrician, the moralist, the politician, the theologian himself, when
he shall sincerely seek truth, will find that the corner-stone which
serves for the foundation of all superstitious systems, is evidently
rested upon fiction. The philosopher will discover in matter a
sufficient cause for its existence; he will perceive that its motion,
its combination, its modes of acting, are always regulated by general
laws, incapable of variation. The geometrician, without quiting nature,
will calculate the active force of matter; it will then become obvious
to him, that to explain its phenomena, it is by no means necessary to
have recourse to that which is incommensurable with all known powers.
The politician, instructed in the true spring which can act upon the
mind of nations, will feel distinctly, that it is not imperative to
recur to imaginary theories, whilst there are actual motives to
give play to the volition of the citizens; to induce them to labour
efficaciously to the maintenance of their association; he will readily
acknowledge that fictitious systems are calculated either to slaken the
exertions, or to disturb the motion of so complicated a machine an human
society. He who shall more honor truth than the vain subtilities of
theology, will quickly perceive that this pompous science is nothing
more than an unintelligible jumble of false hypothesis; that it
continually begs its principles; is full of sophisms; contains only
vitiated circles; embraces the most subdolous distinctions; is ushered
to mankind by the most disingenuous arguments, from which it is not
possible, under any given circumstances, there should result any thing
but puerilities--the most endless disputes. In short, all men who
have sound ideas of morality, whose notions of virtue are correct, who
understand what is useful to the human being in society, whether it be
to conserve himself individually, or the body of which he is a member,
will acknowledge, that in order to discover his relations, to ascertain
his duties, he has only to consult his own nature; that he ought to be
particularly careful neither to found them upon discrepant systems, nor
to borrow them from models that never can do more than disturb his mind;
that will only render his conduct fluctuating; that will leave him for
ever uncertain of its proper character.

Thus, every rational thinker, who renounces his prejudices, will be
enabled to feel the inutility, to comprehend the fallacy of so many
abstract systems; he will perceive that they have hitherto answered
no other purpose than to confound the notions of mankind; to render
doubtful the clearest truths. In quitting the regions of the empyreum,
where his mind can only bewilder itself, in re-entering his proper
sphere, in consulting reason, man will discover that of which he
needs the knowledge; he will be able to undeceive himself upon those
chimerical theories, which enthusiasm has substituted for actual natural
causes; to detect those figments, by which imposture has almost every
where superseded the real motives that can give activity in nature; out
of which the human mind never rambles, without going woefully astray;
without laying the foundation of future misery.

The Deicolists, as well as the theologians, continually reproach their
adversaries with their taste for paradoxes--with their attachment to
systems; whilst they themselves found all their reasoning upon imaginary
hypothesis--upon visionary theories; make a principle of submitting
their understanding to the yoke of authority; of renouncing experience;
of setting down as nothing the evidence of their senses. Would it not
be justifiable in the disciples of nature, to say to these men, who thus
despise her, "We only assure ourselves of that which we see; we yield to
nothing but evidence; if we have a system, it is one founded upon
facts; we perceive in ourselves, we behold every where else, nothing
but matter; we therefore conclude from it that matter can both feel
and think: we see that the motion of the universe is operated after
mechanical laws; that the whole results from the properties, is the
effect of the combination, the immediate consequence of the modification
of matter; thus, we are content, we seek no other explication of the
phenomena which nature presents. We conceive only an unique world, in
which every thing is connected; where each effect is linked to a natural
cause, either known or unknown, which it produces according to necessary
laws; we affirm nothing that is not demonstrable; nothing that you are
not obliged to admit as well as ourselves: the principles we lay down
are distinct: they are self-evident: they are facts. If we find
some things unintelligible, if causes frequently become arduous, we
ingenuously agree to their obscurity; that is to say, to the limits
of our own knowledge. But in order to explain these effects, we do not
imagine an hypothesis; we either consent to be for ever ignorant
of them, or else we wait patiently until time, experience, with the
progress of the human mind, shall throw them into light: is not, then,
our manner of philosophizing consistent with truth? Indeed, in whatever
we advance upon the subject of nature, we proceed precisely in the same
manner as our opponents themselves pursue in all the other sciences,
such as natural history, experimental philosophy, mathematics,
chemistry, &c. We scrupulously confine ourselves to what comes to our
knowledge through the medium of our senses; the only instruments with
which nature has furnished us to discover truth. What is the conduct of
our adversaries? In order to expound things of which they are ignorant,
they imagine theories still more incomprehensible than what they are
desirous to explain; theories of which they themselves are obliged to
acknowledge they have not the most slender notion. Thus they invert the
true principles of logic, which require we should proceed gradually from
that which is most known, to that with which we are least acquainted.
Again, upon what do they found the existence of these theories, by whose
aid they pretend to solve all difficulties? It is upon the universal
ignorance of mankind; upon the inexperience of man; upon his fears; upon
his disordered imagination; upon a pretended _intimate sense_, which in
reality is nothing more than the effect of vulgar prejudice; the result
of dread; the consequence of the want of a reflecting habit, which
induces them to crouch to the opinions of others; to be guided by the
mandates of authority, rather than take the trouble to examine for their
own information. Such, O theologians! are the ruinous foundations upon
which you erect the superstructure of your doctrine. Accordingly, you
find it impossible to form to yourselves any distinct idea of those
theories which serve for the basis of your systems; you are unable to
comprehend either their attributes, their existence, the nature of their
localities, or their mode of action. Thus, even by your own confession,
ye are in a state of profound ignorance, on the primary elements of that
which ye constitute the cause of all that exists: of which, according
to your own account, it is imperative to have a correct knowledge.
Under whatever point of view, therefore, ye are contemplated, it must be
admitted ye are the founders of aerial systems; of fanciful theories:
of all systematizers, ye are consequently the most absurd; because in
challenging your imagination to create a cause, this cause, at least,
ought to diffuse light over the whole; it would be upon this condition
alone that its incomprehensibility could be pardonable; but to speak
ingenuously, does this cause serve to explain any thing? Does it make us
conceive more clearly the origin of the world; bring us more distinctly
acquainted with the actual nature of man; does it more intelligibly
elucidate the faculties of the soul; or point out with more perspicuity
the source of good and evil? No! unquestionably: these subtle
theories explain nothing, although they multiply to infinity their own
difficulties; they, in fact, embarrass elucidation, by plunging into
greater obscurity those matters in which they are interposed. Whatever
may be the question agitated, it becomes complicated: as soon as these
theories are introduced, they envelope the most demonstrable sciences
with a thick, impenetrable mist; render the most simple notions complex;
give opacity to the most diaphanous ideas; turn the most evident
opinions into insolvable enigmas. What exposition of morality does the
theories, upon which ye found all the virtue, present to man? Do not
all your oracles breathe inconsistency? Does not your doctrines embrace
every gradation of character, however discrepant: every known property,
however opposed. All your ingenious systems, all your mysteries, all the
subtilties which ye have invented, are they capable of reconciling that
discordant assemblage of amiable and unamiable qualities, with which
ye have dressed up your figments? In short, is it not by these theories
that ye disturb the harmony of the universe; is it not in their name
ye follow up your barbarous proscriptions; in their support, that ye
so inhumanly exterminate all who refuse to subscribe to your organized
reveries; who withhold assent to those efforts of the imagination which
ye have collectively decorated with the pompous name of religion; but
which, individually, ye brand as superstition, always excepting that to
which ye lend yourselves. Agree, then, O Theologians! Acknowledge,
then, ye subtle metaphysicians! Consent, then, ye organizers of fanciful
theories! that not only are ye systematically absurd, but also that ye
finish by being atrocious; because whenever ye obtain the ascendancy one
over the other, your unfortunate pre-eminence is distinguished by the
most malevolent persecution; your domination is ushered in with cruelty;
your career is described with blood: from the importance which your own
interest attaches to your ruinous dogmas; from the pride with which ye
tumble down the less fortunate systems of those who started with you for
the prize of plunder; _from that savage ferocity, under which ye
equally overwhelm human reason, the happiness of the individual, and the
felicity of nations._"





CHAP. XIV.

_A Summary of the Code of Nature_.


Truth is the only object worthy the research of every wise man; since
that which is false cannot be useful to him: whatever constantly injures
him cannot be founded upon truth; consequently, ought to be for ever
proscribed. It is, then, to assist the human mind, truly to labour for
his happiness, to point out to him the clew by which he may extricate
himself from those frightful labyrinths in which his imagination
wanders; from those sinuosities whose devious course makes him err,
without ever finding a termination to his incertitude. Nature alone,
known through experience, can furnish him with this desirable thread;
her eternal energies can alone supply the means of attacking the
Minotaur; of exterminating the figments of hypocrisy; of destroying
those monsters, who during so many ages, have devoured the unhappy
victims, which the tyranny of the ministers of Moloch have exacted as
a cruel tribute from affrighted mortals. By steadily grasping this
inestimable clew, rendered still more precious by the beauty of the
donor, man can never be led astray--will never ramble out of his course;
but if, careless of its invaluable properties, for a single instant he
suffers it to drop from his hand; if, like another Theseus, ungrateful
for the favour, he abandons the fair bestower, he will infallibly fall
again into his ancient wanderings; most assuredly become the prey to the
cannibal offspring of the White Bull. In vain shall he carry his views
above his head, to find resources which are at his feet; so long as man,
infatuated with his superstitious notions, shall seek in an imaginary
world the rule of his earthly conduct, he will be without principles;
while he shall pertinaciously contemplate the regions of a distempered
fancy, so long he will grope in those where he actually finds himself;
his uncertain steps will never encounter the welfare he desires; never
lead him to that repose after which he so ardently sighs, nor conduct
him to that surety which is so decidedly requisite to consolidate his
happiness.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of The World English Bible (WEB): Complete

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: The World English Bible (WEB):

Release Date: June, 2005  [EBook #8294]
[This file was first posted on July 4, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, THE WORLD ENGLISH BIBLE (WEB): COMPLETE ***




From www.ebible.org with slight reformatting by Martin Ward.



Book 01 Genesis
001:001 In the beginning God{After "God," the Hebrew has the two letters
        "Aleph Tav" (the first and last letters of the Hebrew alphabet)
        as a grammatical marker.} created the heavens and the earth.
001:002 Now the earth was formless and empty.  Darkness was on the surface
        of the deep.  God's Spirit was hovering over the surface
        of the waters.
001:003 God said, "Let there be light," and there was light.
001:004 God saw the light, and saw that it was good.  God divided
        the light from the darkness.
001:005 God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night.
        There was evening and there was morning, one day.
001:006 God said, "Let there be an expanse in the middle of the waters,
        and let it divide the waters from the waters."
001:007 God made the expanse, and divided the waters which were under
        the expanse from the waters which were above the expanse;
        and it was so.
001:008 God called the expanse sky.  There was evening and there
        was morning, a second day.
001:009 God said, "Let the waters under the sky be gathered together
        to one place, and let the dry land appear;" and it was so.
001:010 God called the dry land Earth, and the gathering together
        of the waters he called Seas.  God saw that it was good.
001:011 God said, "Let the earth put forth grass, herbs yielding seed,
        and fruit trees bearing fruit after their kind, with its seed
        in it, on the earth;" and it was so.
001:012 The earth brought forth grass, herbs yielding seed after their kind,
        and trees bearing fruit, with its seed in it, after their kind;
        and God saw that it was good.
001:013 There was evening and there was morning, a third day.
001:014 God said, "Let there be lights in the expanse of sky to
        divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs,
        and for seasons, and for days and years;
001:015 and let them be for lights in the expanse of sky to give light
        on the earth;" and it was so.
001:016 God made the two great lights:  the greater light to rule
        the day, and the lesser light to rule the night.
        He also made the stars.
001:017 God set them in the expanse of sky to give light to the earth,
001:018 and to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide
        the light from the darkness.  God saw that it was good.
001:019 There was evening and there was morning, a fourth day.
001:020 God said, "Let the waters swarm with swarms of living creatures,
        and let birds fly above the earth in the open expanse of sky."
001:021 God created the large sea creatures, and every living
        creature that moves, with which the waters swarmed,
        after their kind, and every winged bird after its kind.
        God saw that it was good.
001:022 God blessed them, saying, "Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill
        the waters in the seas, and let birds multiply on the earth."
001:023 There was evening and there was morning, a fifth day.
001:024 God said, "Let the earth bring forth living creatures after
        their kind, livestock, creeping things, and animals of the earth
        after their kind;" and it was so.
001:025 God made the animals of the earth after their kind,
        and the livestock after their kind, and everything that creeps
        on the ground after its kind.  God saw that it was good.
001:026 God said, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness:
        and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea,
        and over the birds of the sky, and over the livestock,
        and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that
        creeps on the earth."
001:027 God created man in his own image.  In God's image he created him;
        male and female he created them.
001:028 God blessed them.  God said to them, "Be fruitful, multiply,
        fill the earth, and subdue it.  Have dominion over the fish
        of the sea, over the birds of the sky, and over every living
        thing that moves on the earth."
001:029 God said, "Behold, I have given you every herb yielding seed,
        which is on the surface of all the earth, and every tree,
        which bears fruit yielding seed.  It will be your food.
001:030 To every animal of the earth, and to every bird of the sky,
        and to everything that creeps on the earth, in which there is life,
        I have given every green herb for food;" and it was so.
001:031 God saw everything that he had made, and, behold, it was very good.
        There was evening and there was morning, a sixth day.
002:001 The heavens and the earth were finished, and all their vast array.
002:002 On the seventh day God finished his work which he had made;
        and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which
        he had made.
002:003 God blessed the seventh day, and made it holy, because he rested
        in it from all his work which he had created and made.
002:004 This is the history of the generations of the heavens and of
        the earth when they were created, in the day that Yahweh God
        made the earth and the heavens.
002:005 No plant of the field was yet in the earth, and no herb of
        the field had yet sprung up; for Yahweh God had not caused it
        to rain on the earth.  There was not a man to till the ground,
002:006 but a mist went up from the earth, and watered the whole
        surface of the ground.
002:007 Yahweh God formed man from the dust of the ground,
        and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man
        became a living soul.
002:008 Yahweh God planted a garden eastward, in Eden, and there he put
        the man whom he had formed.
002:009 Out of the ground Yahweh God made every tree to grow that is
        pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life
        also in the middle of the garden, and the tree of the knowledge
        of good and evil.
002:010 A river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from there
        it was parted, and became four heads.
002:011 The name of the first is Pishon:  this is the one which flows
        through the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold;
002:012 and the gold of that land is good.  There is aromatic resin
        and the onyx stone.
002:013 The name of the second river is Gihon:  the same river that flows
        through the whole land of Cush.
002:014 The name of the third river is Hiddekel:  this is the one which
        flows in front of Assyria.  The fourth river is the Euphrates.
002:015 Yahweh God took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden
        to dress it and to keep it.
002:016 Yahweh God commanded the man, saying, "Of every tree of the garden
        you may freely eat;
002:017 but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, you shall
        not eat of it; for in the day that you eat of it you
        will surely die."
002:018 Yahweh God said, "It is not good that the man should be alone;
        I will make him a helper suitable for him."
002:019 Out of the ground Yahweh God formed every animal of the field,
        and every bird of the sky, and brought them to the man to see
        what he would call them.  Whatever the man called every
        living creature, that was its name.
002:020 The man gave names to all livestock, and to the birds of the sky,
        and to every animal of the field; but for man there was not
        found a helper suitable for him.
002:021 Yahweh God caused a deep sleep to fall on the man, and he slept;
        and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh
        in its place.
002:022 He made the rib, which Yahweh God had taken from the man,
        into a woman, and brought her to the man.
002:023 The man said, "This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh.
        She will be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man."
002:024 Therefore a man will leave his father and his mother,
        and will join with his wife, and they will be one flesh.
002:025 They were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.
003:001 Now the serpent was more subtle than any animal of the field
        which Yahweh God had made.  He said to the woman, "Has God
        really said, 'You shall not eat of any tree of the garden?'"
003:002 The woman said to the serpent, "Of the fruit of the trees
        of the garden we may eat,
003:003 but of the fruit of the tree which is in the middle of the garden,
        God has said, 'You shall not eat of it, neither shall you
        touch it, lest you die.'"
003:004 The serpent said to the woman, "You won't surely die,
003:005 for God knows that in the day you eat it, your eyes will be opened,
        and you will be like God, knowing good and evil."
003:006 When the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it
        was a delight to the eyes, and that the tree was to be desired
        to make one wise, she took of the fruit of it, and ate;
        and she gave some to her husband with her, and he ate.
003:007 The eyes of both of them were opened, and they knew
        that they were naked.  They sewed fig leaves together,
        and made themselves aprons.
003:008 They heard the voice of Yahweh God walking in the garden in
        the cool of the day, and the man and his wife hid themselves
        from the presence of Yahweh God among the trees of the garden.
003:009 Yahweh God called to the man, and said to him, "Where are you?"
003:010 The man said, "I heard your voice in the garden, and I was afraid,
        because I was naked; and I hid myself."
003:011 God said, "Who told you that you were naked?  Have you eaten
        from the tree that I commanded you not to eat from?"
003:012 The man said, "The woman whom you gave to be with me,
        she gave me of the tree, and I ate."
003:013 Yahweh God said to the woman, "What is this you have done?"
        The woman said, "The serpent deceived me, and I ate."
003:014 Yahweh God said to the serpent, "Because you have done this,
        cursed are you above all livestock, and above every animal
        of the field.  On your belly shall you go, and you shall eat
        dust all the days of your life.
003:015 I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your
        offspring and her offspring.  He will bruise your head,
        and you will bruise his heel."
003:016 To the woman he said, "I will greatly multiply your pain
        in childbirth.  In pain you will bring forth children.
        Your desire will be for your husband, and he will rule over you."
003:017 To Adam he said, "Because you have listened to your wife's voice,
        and have eaten of the tree, of which I commanded you, saying,
        'You shall not eat of it,' cursed is the ground for your sake.
        In toil you will eat of it all the days of your life.
003:018 Thorns also and thistles will it bring forth to you;
        and you will eat the herb of the field.
003:019 By the sweat of your face will you eat bread until you
        return to the ground, for out of it you were taken.
        For you are dust, and to dust you shall return."
003:020 The man called his wife Eve, because she was the mother
        of all living.
003:021 Yahweh God made coats of skins for Adam and for his wife,
        and clothed them.
003:022 Yahweh God said, "Behold, the man has become like one of us,
        knowing good and evil.  Now, lest he put forth his hand,
        and also take of the tree of life, and eat, and live forever..."
003:023 Therefore Yahweh God sent him forth from the garden of Eden,
        to till the ground from which he was taken.
003:024 So he drove out the man; and he placed Cherubs at the east
        of the garden of Eden, and the flame of a sword which turned
        every way, to guard the way to the tree of life.
004:001 The man knew Eve his wife.  She conceived, and gave birth to Cain,
        and said, "I have gotten a man with Yahweh's help."
004:002 Again she gave birth, to Cain's brother Abel.  Abel was a keeper
        of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground.
004:003 As time passed, it happened that Cain brought an offering
        to Yahweh from the fruit of the ground.
004:004 Abel also brought some of the firstborn of his flock and of
        the fat of it.  Yahweh respected Abel and his offering,
004:005 but he didn't respect Cain and his offering.  Cain was very angry,
        and the expression on his face fell.
004:006 Yahweh said to Cain, "Why are you angry?  Why has the expression
        of your face fallen?
004:007 If you do well, will it not be lifted up?  If you don't do well,
        sin crouches at the door.  Its desire is for you, but you
        are to rule over it."
004:008 Cain said to Abel, his brother, "Let's go into the field."
        It happened when they were in the field, that Cain rose up
        against Abel, his brother, and killed him.
004:009 Yahweh said to Cain, "Where is Abel, your brother?"
        He said, "I don't know.  Am I my brother's keeper?"
004:010 Yahweh said, "What have you done?  The voice of your brother's
        blood cries to me from the ground.
004:011 Now you are cursed because of the ground, which has opened
        its mouth to receive your brother's blood from your hand.
004:012 From now on, when you till the ground, it won't yield its
        strength to you.  You shall be a fugitive and a wanderer
        in the earth."
004:013 Cain said to Yahweh, "My punishment is greater than I can bear.
004:014 Behold, you have driven me out this day from the surface
        of the ground.  I will be hidden from your face,
        and I will be a fugitive and a wanderer in the earth.
        It will happen that whoever finds me will kill me."
004:015 Yahweh said to him, "Therefore whoever slays Cain, vengeance will
        be taken on him sevenfold."  Yahweh appointed a sign for Cain,
        lest any finding him should strike him.
004:016 Cain went out from Yahweh's presence, and lived in the land
        of Nod, east of Eden.
004:017 Cain knew his wife.  She conceived, and gave birth to Enoch.
        He built a city, and called the name of the city, after the name
        of his son, Enoch.
004:018 To Enoch was born Irad.  Irad became the father of Mehujael.
        Mehujael became the father of Methushael.  Methushael became
        the father of Lamech.
004:019 Lamech took two wives:  the name of the one was Adah,
        and the name of the other Zillah.
004:020 Adah gave birth to Jabal, who was the father of those who dwell
        in tents and have livestock.
004:021 His brother's name was Jubal, who was the father of all who
        handle the harp and pipe.
004:022 Zillah also gave birth to Tubal Cain, the forger of every cutting
        instrument of brass and iron.  Tubal Cain's sister was Naamah.
004:023 Lamech said to his wives, "Adah and Zillah, hear my voice.
        You wives of Lamech, listen to my speech, for I have slain
        a man for wounding me, a young man for bruising me.
004:024 If Cain will be avenged seven times, truly Lamech
        seventy-seven times."
004:025 Adam knew his wife again.  She gave birth to a son, and named
        him Seth, "for God has appointed me another child instead
        of Abel, for Cain killed him."
004:026 There was also born a son to Seth, and he named him Enosh.
        Then men began to call on Yahweh's name.
005:001 This is the book of the generations of Adam.  In the day
        that God created man, he made him in God's likeness.
005:002 He created them male and female, and blessed them, and called
        their name Adam,{"Adam" and "Man" are spelled with the exact
        same consonants in Hebrew, so this can be correctly translated
        either way.} in the day when they were created.
005:003 Adam lived one hundred thirty years, and became the father of a
        son in his own likeness, after his image, and named him Seth.
005:004 The days of Adam after he became the father of Seth were eight
        hundred years, and he became the father of sons and daughters.
005:005 All the days that Adam lived were nine hundred thirty years,
        then he died.
005:006 Seth lived one hundred five years, and became the father of Enosh.
005:007 Seth lived after he became the father of Enosh eight hundred
        seven years, and became the father of sons and daughters.
005:008 All the days of Seth were nine hundred twelve years,
        then he died.
005:009 Enosh lived ninety years, and became the father of Kenan.
005:010 Enosh lived after he became the father of Kenan, eight hundred
        fifteen years, and became the father of sons and daughters.
005:011 All the days of Enosh were nine hundred five years, then he died.
005:012 Kenan lived seventy years, and became the father of Mahalalel.
005:013 Kenan lived after he became the father of Mahalalel eight hundred
        forty years, and became the father of sons and daughters
005:014 and all the days of Kenan were nine hundred ten years,
        then he died.
005:015 Mahalalel lived sixty-five years, and became the father of Jared.
005:016 Mahalalel lived after he became the father of Jared eight hundred
        thirty years, and became the father of sons and daughters.
005:017 All the days of Mahalalel were eight hundred ninety-five years,
        then he died.
005:018 Jared lived one hundred sixty-two years, and became
        the father of Enoch.
005:019 Jared lived after he became the father of Enoch eight hundred years,
        and became the father of sons and daughters.
005:020 All the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty-two years,
        then he died.
005:021 Enoch lived sixty-five years, and became the father of Methuselah.
005:022 Enoch walked with God after he became the father of Methuselah
        three hundred years, and became the father of sons and daughters.
005:023 All the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty-five years.
005:024 Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.
005:025 Methuselah lived one hundred eighty-seven years, and became
        the father of Lamech.
005:026 Methuselah lived after he became the father of Lamech seven hundred
        eighty-two years, and became the father of sons and daughters.
005:027 All the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty-nine years,
        then he died.
005:028 Lamech lived one hundred eighty-two years, and became the father
        of a son,
005:029 and he named him Noah, saying, "This same will comfort us
        in our work and in the toil of our hands, because of the ground
        which Yahweh has cursed."
005:030 Lamech lived after he became the father of Noah five hundred
        ninety-five years, and became the father of sons and daughters.
005:031 All the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy-seven years,
        then he died.
005:032 Noah was five hundred years old, and Noah became the father
        of Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
006:001 It happened, when men began to multiply on the surface
        of the ground, and daughters were born to them,
006:002 that God's sons saw that men's daughters were beautiful,
        and they took for themselves wives of all that they chose.
006:003 Yahweh said, "My Spirit will not strive with man forever,
        because he also is flesh; yet will his days be one
        hundred twenty years."
006:004 The Nephilim were in the earth in those days, and also
        after that, when God's sons came in to men's daughters.
        They bore children to them.  Those were the mighty men
        who were of old, men of renown.
006:005 Yahweh saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth,
        and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was
        only evil continually.
006:006 Yahweh was sorry that he had made man on the earth, and it
        grieved him in his heart.
006:007 Yahweh said, "I will destroy man whom I have created
        from the surface of the ground; man, along with animals,
        creeping things, and birds of the sky; for I am sorry that I
        have made them."
006:008 But Noah found favor in Yahweh's eyes.
006:009 This is the history of the generations of Noah.  Noah was
        a righteous man, blameless among the people of his time.
        Noah walked with God.
006:010 Noah became the father of three sons:  Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
006:011 The earth was corrupt before God, and the earth was
        filled with violence.
006:012 God saw the earth, and saw that it was corrupt, for all flesh
        had corrupted their way on the earth.
006:013 God said to Noah, "The end of all flesh has come before me,
        for the earth is filled with violence through them.
        Behold, I will destroy them with the earth.
006:014 Make a ship of gopher wood.  You shall make rooms in the ship,
        and shall seal it inside and outside with pitch.
006:015 This is how you shall make it.  The length of the ship will
        be three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits,
        and the height of it thirty cubits.
006:016 You shall make a roof in the ship, and to a cubit shall you finish
        it upward.  You shall set the door of the ship in its side.
        You shall make it with lower, second, and third levels.
006:017 I, even I, do bring the flood of waters on this earth, to destroy
        all flesh having the breath of life from under the sky.
        Everything that is in the earth will die.
006:018 But I will establish my covenant with you.  You shall come
        into the ship, you, your sons, your wife, and your sons'
        wives with you.
006:019 Of every living thing of all flesh, you shall bring two
        of every sort into the ship, to keep them alive with you.
        They shall be male and female.
006:020 Of the birds after their kind, of the livestock after their kind,
        of every creeping thing of the ground after its kind,
        two of every sort shall come to you, to keep them alive.
006:021 Take with you of all food that is eaten, and gather it to you;
        and it will be for food for you, and for them."
006:022 Thus Noah did.  According to all that God commanded him,
        so he did.
007:001 Yahweh said to Noah, "Come with all of your household into
        the ship, for I have seen your righteousness before me
        in this generation.
007:002 You shall take seven pairs of every clean animal with you,
        the male and his female.  Of the animals that are not clean,
        take two, the male and his female.
007:003 Also of the birds of the sky, seven and seven, male and female,
        to keep seed alive on the surface of all the earth.
007:004 In seven days, I will cause it to rain on the earth for forty
        days and forty nights.  Every living thing that I have made,
        I will destroy from the surface of the ground."
007:005 Noah did everything that Yahweh commanded him.
007:006 Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters came
        on the earth.
007:007 Noah went into the ship with his sons, his wife, and his sons'
        wives, because of the waters of the flood.
007:008 Clean animals, animals that are not clean, birds, and everything
        that creeps on the ground
007:009 went by pairs to Noah into the ship, male and female,
        as God commanded Noah.
007:010 It happened after the seven days, that the waters of the flood
        came on the earth.
007:011 In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month,
        on the seventeenth day of the month, on the same day all
        the fountains of the great deep were burst open, and the sky's
        windows were opened.
007:012 The rain was on the earth forty days and forty nights.
007:013 In the same day Noah, and Shem, Ham, and Japheth, the sons of Noah,
        and Noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons with them,
        entered into the ship;
007:014 they, and every animal after its kind, all the livestock after
        their kind, every creeping thing that creeps on the earth
        after its kind, and every bird after its kind, every bird
        of every sort.
007:015 They went to Noah into the ship, by pairs of all flesh with
        the breath of life in them.
007:016 Those who went in, went in male and female of all flesh,
        as God commanded him; and Yahweh shut him in.
007:017 The flood was forty days on the earth.  The waters increased,
        and lifted up the ship, and it was lifted up above the earth.
007:018 The waters prevailed, and increased greatly on the earth;
        and the ship floated on the surface of the waters.
007:019 The waters prevailed exceedingly on the earth.  All the high
        mountains that were under the whole sky were covered.
007:020 The waters prevailed fifteen cubits upward, and the
        mountains were covered.
007:021 All flesh died that moved on the earth, including birds,
        livestock, animals, every creeping thing that creeps on the earth,
        and every man.
007:022 All in whose nostrils was the breath of the spirit of life,
        of all that was on the dry land, died.
007:023 Every living thing was destroyed that was on the surface
        of the ground, including man, livestock, creeping things,
        and birds of the sky.  They were destroyed from the earth.
        Only Noah was left, and those who were with him in the ship.
007:024 The waters prevailed on the earth one hundred fifty days.
008:001 God remembered Noah, all the animals, and all the livestock that were
        with him in the ship; and God made a wind to pass over the earth.
        The waters subsided.
008:002 The deep's fountains and the sky's windows were also stopped,
        and the rain from the sky was restrained.
008:003 The waters receded from the earth continually.  After the end
        of one hundred fifty days the waters decreased.
008:004 The ship rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day
        of the month, on Ararat's mountains.
008:005 The waters receded continually until the tenth month.
        In the tenth month, on the first day of the month, the tops
        of the mountains were seen.
008:006 It happened at the end of forty days, that Noah opened the window
        of the ship which he had made,
008:007 and he sent forth a raven.  It went back and forth,
        until the waters were dried up from the earth.
008:008 He sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were abated
        from the surface of the ground,
008:009 but the dove found no place to rest her foot, and she returned
        to him into the ship; for the waters were on the surface
        of the whole earth.  He put forth his hand, and took her,
        and brought her to him into the ship.
008:010 He stayed yet another seven days; and again he sent forth
        the dove out of the ship.
008:011 The dove came back to him at evening, and, behold, in her mouth
        was an olive leaf plucked off.  So Noah knew that the waters
        were abated from the earth.
008:012 He stayed yet another seven days, and sent forth the dove;
        and she didn't return to him any more.
008:013 It happened in the six hundred first year, in the first month,
        the first day of the month, the waters were dried up from the earth.
        Noah removed the covering of the ship, and looked.
        He saw that the surface of the ground was dried.
008:014 In the second month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month,
        the earth was dry.
008:015 God spoke to Noah, saying,
008:016 "Go out of the ship, you, and your wife, and your sons,
        and your sons' wives with you.
008:017 Bring forth with you every living thing that is with you
        of all flesh, including birds, livestock, and every creeping
        thing that creeps on the earth, that they may breed abundantly
        in the earth, and be fruitful, and multiply on the earth."
008:018 Noah went forth, with his sons, his wife, and his sons'
        wives with him.
008:019 Every animal, every creeping thing, and every bird, whatever moves
        on the earth, after their families, went out of the ship.
008:020 Noah built an altar to Yahweh, and took of every clean animal,
        and of every clean bird, and offered burnt offerings
        on the altar.
008:021 Yahweh smelled the sweet savor.  Yahweh said in his heart,
        "I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake,
        because the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth;
        neither will I ever again strike everything living,
        as I have done.
008:022 While the earth remains, seed time and harvest, and cold and heat,
        and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease."
009:001 God blessed Noah and his sons, and said to them, "Be fruitful,
        and multiply, and replenish the earth.
009:002 The fear of you and the dread of you will be on every
        animal of the earth, and on every bird of the sky.
        Everything that the ground teems with, and all the fish
        of the sea are delivered into your hand.
009:003 Every moving thing that lives will be food for you.
        As the green herb, I have given everything to you.
009:004 But flesh with the life of it, the blood of it, you shall not eat.
009:005 I will surely require your blood of your lives.
        At the hand of every animal I will require it.
        At the hand of man, even at the hand of every man's brother,
        I will require the life of man.
009:006 Whoever sheds man's blood, his blood will be shed by man,
        for God made man in his own image.
009:007 Be fruitful and multiply.  Bring forth abundantly in the earth,
        and multiply in it."
009:008 God spoke to Noah and to his sons with him, saying,
009:009 "As for me, behold, I establish my covenant with you,
        and with your offspring after you,
009:010 and with every living creature that is with you:  the birds,
        the livestock, and every animal of the earth with you,
        of all that go out of the ship, even every animal of the earth.
009:011 I will establish my covenant with you:  all flesh will not be cut
        off any more by the waters of the flood, neither will there
        ever again be a flood to destroy the earth."
009:012 God said, "This is the token of the covenant which I make
        between me and you and every living creature that is with you,
        for perpetual generations:
009:013 I set my rainbow in the cloud, and it will be for a sign
        of a covenant between me and the earth.
009:014 It will happen, when I bring a cloud over the earth,
        that the rainbow will be seen in the cloud,
009:015 and I will remember my covenant, which is between me and you
        and every living creature of all flesh, and the waters will
        no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.
009:016 The rainbow will be in the cloud.  I will look at it, that I
        may remember the everlasting covenant between God and every
        living creature of all flesh that is on the earth."
009:017 God said to Noah, "This is the token of the covenant which I
        have established between me and all flesh that is on the earth."
009:018 The sons of Noah who went forth from the ship were Shem, Ham,
        and Japheth.  Ham is the father of Canaan.
009:019 These three were the sons of Noah, and from these, the whole
        earth was populated.
009:020 Noah began to be a farmer, and planted a vineyard.
009:021 He drank of the wine and got drunk.  He was uncovered
        within his tent.
009:022 Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father,
        and told his two brothers outside.
009:023 Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid it on both their shoulders,
        went in backwards, and covered the nakedness of their father.
        Their faces were backwards, and they didn't see
        their father's nakedness.
009:024 Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his youngest son had
        done to him.
009:025 He said, "Canaan is cursed.  He will be servant of servants
        to his brothers."
009:026 He said, "Blessed be Yahweh, the God of Shem.  Let Canaan
        be his servant.
009:027 May God enlarge Japheth.  Let him dwell in the tents of Shem.
        Let Canaan be his servant."
009:028 Noah lived three hundred fifty years after the flood.
009:029 All the days of Noah were nine hundred fifty years, then he died.
010:001 Now this is the history of the generations of the sons of Noah
        and of Shem, Ham, and Japheth.  Sons were born to them
        after the flood.
010:002 The sons of Japheth:  Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech,
        and Tiras.
010:003 The sons of Gomer:  Ashkenaz, Riphath, and Togarmah.
010:004 The sons of Javan:  Elishah, Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim.
010:005 Of these were the islands of the nations divided in their lands,
        everyone after his language, after their families,
        in their nations.
010:006 The sons of Ham:  Cush, Mizraim, Put, and Canaan.
010:007 The sons of Cush:  Seba, Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah, and Sabteca.
        The sons of Raamah:  Sheba and Dedan.
010:008 Cush became the father of Nimrod.  He began to be a mighty
        one in the earth.
010:009 He was a mighty hunter before Yahweh.  Therefore it is said,
        "Like Nimrod, a mighty hunter before Yahweh."
010:010 The beginning of his kingdom was Babel, Erech, Accad, and Calneh,
        in the land of Shinar.
010:011 Out of that land he went forth into Assyria, and built
        Nineveh, Rehoboth Ir, Calah,
010:012 and Resen between Nineveh and Calah (the same is the great city).
010:013 Mizraim became the father of Ludim, Anamim, Lehabim, Naphtuhim,
010:014 Pathrusim, Casluhim (which the Philistines descended from),
        and Caphtorim.
010:015 Canaan became the father of Sidon (his firstborn), Heth,
010:016 the Jebusite, the Amorite, the Girgashite,
010:017 the Hivite, the Arkite, the Sinite,
010:018 the Arvadite, the Zemarite, and the Hamathite.
        Afterward the families of the Canaanites were spread abroad.
010:019 The border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, as you go
        toward Gerar, to Gaza; as you go toward Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah,
        and Zeboiim, to Lasha.
010:020 These are the sons of Ham, after their families,
        after their languages, in their lands, in their nations.
010:021 To Shem, the father of all the children of Eber, the elder
        brother of Japheth, to him also were children born.
010:022 The sons of Shem:  Elam, Asshur, Arpachshad, Lud, and Aram.
010:023 The sons of Aram:  Uz, Hul, Gether, and Mash.
010:024 Arpachshad became the father of Shelah.  Shelah became
        the father of Eber.
010:025 To Eber were born two sons.  The name of the one was Peleg,
        for in his days the earth was divided.  His brother's
        name was Joktan.
010:026 Joktan became the father of Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmaveth, Jerah,
010:027 Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah,
010:028 Obal, Abimael, Sheba,
010:029 Ophir, Havilah, and Jobab.  All these were the sons of Joktan.
010:030 Their dwelling was from Mesha, as you go toward Sephar,
        the mountain of the east.
010:031 These are the sons of Shem, after their families,
        after their languages, in their lands, after their nations.
010:032 These are the families of the sons of Noah, after their generations,
        in their nations.  Of these were the nations divided in the earth
        after the flood.
011:001 The whole earth was of one language and of one speech.
011:002 It happened, as they traveled east, that they found a plain
        in the land of Shinar, and they lived there.
011:003 They said one to another, "Come, let's make bricks, and burn
        them thoroughly."  They had brick for stone, and they used
        tar for mortar.
011:004 They said, "Come, let's build ourselves a city, and a tower
        whose top reaches to the sky, and let's make ourselves a name,
        lest we be scattered abroad on the surface of the whole earth."
011:005 Yahweh came down to see the city and the tower, which the children
        of men built.
011:006 Yahweh said, "Behold, they are one people, and they have
        all one language, and this is what they begin to do.
        Now nothing will be withheld from them, which they intend to do.
011:007 Come, let's go down, and there confuse their language,
        that they may not understand one another's speech."
011:008 So Yahweh scattered them abroad from there on the surface
        of all the earth.  They stopped building the city.
011:009 Therefore the name of it was called Babel, because there
        Yahweh confused the language of all the earth.  From there,
        Yahweh scattered them abroad on the surface of all the earth.
011:010 This is the history of the generations of Shem.  Shem was
        one hundred years old and became the father of Arpachshad
        two years after the flood.
011:011 Shem lived five hundred years after he became the father
        of Arpachshad, and became the father of sons and daughters.
011:012 Arpachshad lived thirty-five years and became the father of Shelah.
011:013 Arpachshad lived four hundred three years after he became the father
        of Shelah, and became the father of sons and daughters.
011:014 Shelah lived thirty years, and became the father of Eber:
011:015 and Shelah lived four hundred three years after he became
        the father of Eber, and became the father of sons and daughters.
011:016 Eber lived thirty-four years, and became the father of Peleg.
011:017 Eber lived four hundred thirty years after he became the father
        of Peleg, and became the father of sons and daughters.
011:018 Peleg lived thirty years, and became the father of Reu.
011:019 Peleg lived two hundred nine years after he became the father
        of Reu, and became the father of sons and daughters.
011:020 Reu lived thirty-two years, and became the father of Serug.
011:021 Reu lived two hundred seven years after he became the father
        of Serug, and became the father of sons and daughters.
011:022 Serug lived thirty years, and became the father of Nahor.
011:023 Serug lived two hundred years after he became the father of Nahor,
        and became the father of sons and daughters.
011:024 Nahor lived twenty-nine years, and became the father of Terah.
011:025 Nahor lived one hundred nineteen years after he became the father
        of Terah, and became the father of sons and daughters.
011:026 Terah lived seventy years, and became the father
        of Abram, Nahor, and Haran.
011:027 Now this is the history of the generations of Terah.
        Terah became the father of Abram, Nahor, and Haran.
        Haran became the father of Lot.
011:028 Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his birth,
        in Ur of the Chaldees.
011:029 Abram and Nahor took wives.  The name of Abram's wife was Sarai,
        and the name of Nahor's wife, Milcah, the daughter of Haran
        who was also the father of Iscah.
011:030 Sarai was barren.  She had no child.
011:031 Terah took Abram his son, Lot the son of Haran, his son's son,
        and Sarai his daughter-in-law, his son Abram's wife.  They went
        forth from Ur of the Chaldees, to go into the land of Canaan.
        They came to Haran and lived there.
011:032 The days of Terah were two hundred five years.
        Terah died in Haran.
012:001 Now Yahweh said to Abram, "Get out of your country,
        and from your relatives, and from your father's house,
        to the land that I will show you.
012:002 I will make of you a great nation.  I will bless you and make
        your name great.  You will be a blessing.
012:003 I will bless those who bless you, and I will curse him
        who curses you.  In you will all of the families of the
        earth be blessed."
012:004 So Abram went, as Yahweh had spoken to him.  Lot went with him.
        Abram was seventy-five years old when he departed out of Haran.
012:005 Abram took Sarai his wife, Lot his brother's son, all their substance
        that they had gathered, and the souls whom they had gotten
        in Haran, and they went forth to go into the land of Canaan.
        Into the land of Canaan they came.
012:006 Abram passed through the land to the place of Shechem,
        to the oak of Moreh.  The Canaanite was then in the land.
012:007 Yahweh appeared to Abram and said, "I will give this land to
        your seed{or, offspring}." He built an altar there to Yahweh,
        who appeared to him.
012:008 He left from there to the mountain on the east of Bethel,
        and pitched his tent, having Bethel on the west, and Ai
        on the east.  There he built an altar to Yahweh and called
        on the name of Yahweh.
012:009 Abram traveled, going on still toward the South.
012:010 There was a famine in the land.  Abram went down into Egypt
        to live as a foreigner there, for the famine was severe
        in the land.
012:011 It happened, when he had come near to enter Egypt, that he said
        to Sarai his wife, "See now, I know that you are a beautiful
        woman to look at.
012:012 It will happen, when the Egyptians will see you, that they
        will say, 'This is his wife.'  They will kill me, but they
        will save you alive.
012:013 Please say that you are my sister, that it may be well with me
        for your sake, and that my soul may live because of you."
012:014 It happened that when Abram had come into Egypt, the Egyptians
        saw that the woman was very beautiful.
012:015 The princes of Pharaoh saw her, and praised her to Pharaoh;
        and the woman was taken into Pharaoh's house.
012:016 He dealt well with Abram for her sake.  He had sheep,
        oxen, male donkeys, male servants, female servants,
        female donkeys, and camels.
012:017 Yahweh plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues
        because of Sarai, Abram's wife.
012:018 Pharaoh called Abram and said, "What is this that you have done
        to me?  Why didn't you tell me that she was your wife?
012:019 Why did you say, 'She is my sister,' so that I took her
        to be my wife?  Now therefore, see your wife, take her,
        and go your way."
012:020 Pharaoh gave men charge concerning him, and they brought him
        on the way with his wife and all that he had.
013:001 Abram went up out of Egypt:  he, his wife, all that he had,
        and Lot with him, into the South.
013:002 Abram was very rich in livestock, in silver, and in gold.
013:003 He went on his journeys from the South even to Bethel,
        to the place where his tent had been at the beginning,
        between Bethel and Ai,
013:004 to the place of the altar, which he had made there at the first.
        There Abram called on the name of Yahweh.
013:005 Lot also, who went with Abram, had flocks, and herds, and tents.
013:006 The land was not able to bear them, that they might live together:
        for their substance was great, so that they could not live together.
013:007 There was a strife between the herdsmen of Abram's livestock
        and the herdsmen of Lot's livestock:  and the Canaanite
        and the Perizzite lived in the land at that time.
013:008 Abram said to Lot, "Please, let there be no strife between
        me and you, and between my herdsmen and your herdsmen;
        for we are relatives.
013:009 Isn't the whole land before you?  Please separate yourself from me.
        If you go to the left hand, then I will go to the right.
        Or if you go to the right hand, then I will go to the left."
013:010 Lot lifted up his eyes, and saw all the plain of the Jordan,
        that it was well-watered everywhere, before Yahweh destroyed
        Sodom and Gomorrah, like the garden of Yahweh, like the land
        of Egypt, as you go to Zoar.
013:011 So Lot chose the Plain of the Jordan for himself.
        Lot traveled east, and they separated themselves the one
        from the other.
013:012 Abram lived in the land of Canaan, and Lot lived in the cities
        of the plain, and moved his tent as far as Sodom.
013:013 Now the men of Sodom were exceedingly wicked and sinners
        against Yahweh.
013:014 Yahweh said to Abram, after Lot was separated from him, "Now,
        lift up your eyes, and look from the place where you are,
        northward and southward and eastward and westward,
013:015 for all the land which you see, I will give to you, and to
        your offspring forever.
013:016 I will make your offspring as the dust of the earth, so that
        if a man can number the dust of the earth, then your seed
        may also be numbered.
013:017 Arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the breadth
        of it; for I will give it to you."
013:018 Abram moved his tent, and came and lived by the oaks of Mamre,
        which are in Hebron, and built an altar there to Yahweh.
014:001 It happened in the days of Amraphel, king of Shinar, Arioch,
        king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer, king of Elam, and Tidal,
        king of Goiim,
014:002 that they made war with Bera, king of Sodom, and with Birsha,
        king of Gomorrah, Shinab, king of Admah, and Shemeber,
        king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (the same is Zoar).
014:003 All these joined together in the valley of Siddim (the same
        is the Salt Sea).
014:004 Twelve years they served Chedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth
        year, they rebelled.
014:005 In the fourteenth year Chedorlaomer came, and the kings who
        were with him, and struck the Rephaim in Ashteroth Karnaim,
        and the Zuzim in Ham, and the Emim in Shaveh Kiriathaim,
014:006 and the Horites in their Mount Seir, to Elparan, which is
        by the wilderness.
014:007 They returned, and came to En Mishpat (the same is Kadesh),
        and struck all the country of the Amalekites, and also the Amorites,
        that lived in Hazazon Tamar.
014:008 The king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrah, and the king
        of Admah, and the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela
        (the same is Zoar) went out; and they set the battle in array
        against them in the valley of Siddim;
014:009 against Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of Goiim,
        and Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar;
        four kings against the five.
014:010 Now the valley of Siddim was full of tar pits; and the kings
        of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and they fell there, and those
        who remained fled to the hills.
014:011 They took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their food,
        and went their way.
014:012 They took Lot, Abram's brother's son, who lived in Sodom,
        and his goods, and departed.
014:013 One who had escaped came and told Abram, the Hebrew.
        Now he lived by the oaks of Mamre, the Amorite, brother of Eshcol,
        and brother of Aner; and these were allies of Abram.
014:014 When Abram heard that his relative was taken captive, he led forth
        his trained men, born in his house, three hundred and eighteen,
        and pursued as far as Dan.
014:015 He divided himself against them by night, he and his servants,
        and struck them, and pursued them to Hobah, which is on the left
        hand of Damascus.
014:016 He brought back all the goods, and also brought back
        his relative, Lot, and his goods, and the women also,
        and the people.
014:017 The king of Sodom went out to meet him, after his return from
        the slaughter of Chedorlaomer and the kings who were with him,
        at the valley of Shaveh (that is, the King's Valley).
014:018 Melchizedek king of Salem brought out bread and wine:
        and he was priest of God Most High.
014:019 He blessed him, and said, "Blessed be Abram of God Most High,
        possessor of heaven and earth:
014:020 and blessed be God Most High, who has delivered your enemies
        into your hand."  Abram gave him a tenth of all.
014:021 The king of Sodom said to Abram, "Give me the people,
        and take the goods to yourself."
014:022 Abram said to the king of Sodom, "I have lifted up my hand
        to Yahweh, God Most High, possessor of heaven and earth,
014:023 that I will not take a thread nor a sandal strap nor anything
        that is yours, lest you should say, 'I have made Abram rich.'
014:024 I will accept nothing from you except that which the young men
        have eaten, and the portion of the men who went with me:
        Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre.  Let them take their portion."
015:001 After these things the word of Yahweh came to Abram in
        a vision, saying, "Don't be afraid, Abram.  I am your shield,
        your exceedingly great reward."
015:002 Abram said, "Lord Yahweh, what will you give me, seeing I
        go childless, and he who will inherit my estate is
        Eliezer of Damascus?"
015:003 Abram said, "Behold, to me you have given no seed:
        and, behold, one born in my house is my heir."
015:004 Behold, the word of Yahweh came to him, saying, "This man will
        not be your heir, but he who will come forth out of your own
        body will be your heir."
015:005 Yahweh brought him outside, and said, "Look now toward the sky,
        and count the stars, if you are able to count them."
        He said to Abram, "So shall your seed be."
015:006 He believed in Yahweh; and he reckoned it to him for righteousness.
015:007 He said to him, "I am Yahweh who brought you out of Ur
        of the Chaldees, to give you this land to inherit it."
015:008 He said, "Lord Yahweh, how will I know that I will inherit it?"
015:009 He said to him, "Bring me a heifer three years old, a female
        goat three years old, a ram three years old, a turtledove,
        and a young pigeon."
015:010 He brought him all of these, and divided them in the middle,
        and laid each half opposite the other; but he didn't
        divide the birds.
015:011 The birds of prey came down on the carcasses, and Abram
        drove them away.
015:012 When the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell on Abram.
        Now terror and great darkness fell on him.
015:013 He said to Abram, "Know for sure that your seed will live as
        foreigners in a land that is not theirs, and will serve them.
        They will afflict them four hundred years.
015:014 I will also judge that nation, whom they will serve.
        Afterward they will come out with great wealth,
015:015 but you will go to your fathers in peace.  You will be buried
        in a good old age.
015:016 In the fourth generation they will come here again,
        for the iniquity of the Amorite is not yet full."
015:017 It came to pass that, when the sun went down, and it
        was dark, behold, a smoking furnace, and a flaming torch
        passed between these pieces.
015:018 In that day Yahweh made a covenant with Abram, saying, "To your
        seed I have given this land, from the river of Egypt to
        the great river, the river Euphrates:
015:019 the Kenites, the Kenizzites, the Kadmonites,
015:020 the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Rephaim,
015:021 the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Girgashites, and the Jebusites."
016:001 Now Sarai, Abram's wife, bore him no children.  She had a handmaid,
        an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar.
016:002 Sarai said to Abram, "See now, Yahweh has restrained me from bearing.
        Please go in to my handmaid.  It may be that I will obtain
        children by her."  Abram listened to the voice of Sarai.
016:003 Sarai, Abram's wife, took Hagar the Egyptian, her handmaid,
        after Abram had lived ten years in the land of Canaan,
        and gave her to Abram her husband to be his wife.
016:004 He went in to Hagar, and she conceived.  When she saw that she
        had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes.
016:005 Sarai said to Abram, "This wrong is your fault.
        I gave my handmaid into your bosom, and when she saw
        that she had conceived, I was despised in her eyes.
        Yahweh judge between me and you."
016:006 But Abram said to Sarai, "Behold, your maid is in your hand.
        Do to her whatever is good in your eyes."  Sarai dealt harshly
        with her, and she fled from her face.
016:007 The angel of Yahweh found her by a fountain of water in
        the wilderness, by the fountain in the way to Shur.
016:008 He said, "Hagar, Sarai's handmaid, where did you come from?
        Where are you going?"  She said, "I am fleeing from the face
        of my mistress Sarai."
016:009 The angel of Yahweh said to her, "Return to your mistress,
        and submit yourself under her hands."
016:010 The angel of Yahweh said to her, "I will greatly multiply
        your seed, that they will not be numbered for multitude."
016:011 The angel of Yahweh said to her, "Behold, you are with child,
        and will bear a son.  You shall call his name Ishmael,
        because Yahweh has heard your affliction.
016:012 He will be like a wild donkey among men.  His hand will
        be against every man, and every man's hand against him.
        He will live opposite all of his brothers."
016:013 She called the name of Yahweh who spoke to her, "You are
        a God who sees," for she said, "Have I even stayed alive
        after seeing him?"
016:014 Therefore the well was called Beer Lahai Roi.{Beer Lahai Roi
        means "well of the one who lives and sees me."} Behold,
        it is between Kadesh and Bered.
016:015 Hagar bore a son for Abram.  Abram called the name of his son,
        whom Hagar bore, Ishmael.
016:016 Abram was eighty-six years old when Hagar bore Ishmael to Abram.
017:001 When Abram was ninety-nine years old, Yahweh appeared to Abram,
        and said to him, "I am God Almighty.  Walk before me,
        and be blameless.
017:002 I will make my covenant between me and you, and will
        multiply you exceedingly."
017:003 Abram fell on his face.  God talked with him, saying,
017:004 "As for me, behold, my covenant is with you.  You will be
        the father of a multitude of nations.
017:005 Neither will your name any more be called Abram, but your
        name will be Abraham; for I have made you the father of a
        multitude of nations.
017:006 I will make you exceedingly fruitful, and I will make nations of you.
        Kings will come out of you.
017:007 I will establish my covenant between me and you and your seed
        after you throughout their generations for an everlasting covenant,
        to be a God to you and to your seed after you.
017:008 I will give to you, and to your seed after you, the land
        where you are traveling, all the land of Canaan, for an
        everlasting possession.  I will be their God."
017:009 God said to Abraham, "As for you, you will keep my covenant,
        you and your seed after you throughout their generations.
017:010 This is my covenant, which you shall keep, between me
        and you and your seed after you.  Every male among you
        shall be circumcised.
017:011 You shall be circumcised in the flesh of your foreskin.
        It will be a token of the covenant between me and you.
017:012 He who is eight days old will be circumcised among you,
        every male throughout your generations, he who is born
        in the house, or bought with money from any foreigner who is
        not of your seed.
017:013 He who is born in your house, and he who is bought with your money,
        must be circumcised.  My covenant will be in your flesh
        for an everlasting covenant.
017:014 The uncircumcised male who is not circumcised in the flesh
        of his foreskin, that soul shall be cut off from his people.
        He has broken my covenant."
017:015 God said to Abraham, "As for Sarai your wife, you shall not
        call her name Sarai, but her name will be Sarah.
017:016 I will bless her, and moreover I will give you a son by her.
        Yes, I will bless her, and she will be a mother of nations.
        Kings of peoples will come from her."
017:017 Then Abraham fell on his face, and laughed, and said in his heart,
        "Will a child be born to him who is one hundred years old?
        Will Sarah, who is ninety years old, give birth?"
017:018 Abraham said to God, "Oh that Ishmael might live before you!"
017:019 God said, "No, but Sarah, your wife, will bear you a son.
        You shall call his name Isaac.{Isaac means "he laughs."} I
        will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant
        for his seed after him.
017:020 As for Ishmael, I have heard you.  Behold, I have blessed him,
        and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly.
        He will become the father of twelve princes, and I will make
        him a great nation.
017:021 But my covenant I establish with Isaac, whom Sarah will bear
        to you at this set time next year."
017:022 When he finished talking with him, God went up from Abraham.
017:023 Abraham took Ishmael his son, all who were born in his house,
        and all who were bought with his money; every male among
        the men of Abraham's house, and circumcised the flesh of their
        foreskin in the same day, as God had said to him.
017:024 Abraham was ninety-nine years old, when he was circumcised
        in the flesh of his foreskin.
017:025 Ishmael, his son, was thirteen years old when he was circumcised
        in the flesh of his foreskin.
017:026 In the same day both Abraham and Ishmael, his son, were circumcised.
017:027 All the men of his house, those born in the house, and those
        bought with money of a foreigner, were circumcised with him.
018:001 Yahweh appeared to him by the oaks of Mamre, as he sat
        in the tent door in the heat of the day.
018:002 He lifted up his eyes and looked, and saw that three men
        stood opposite him.  When he saw them, he ran to meet them
        from the tent door, and bowed himself to the earth,
018:003 and said, "My lord, if now I have found favor in your sight,
        please don't go away from your servant.
018:004 Now let a little water be fetched, wash your feet, and rest
        yourselves under the tree.
018:005 I will get a morsel of bread so you can refresh your heart.
        After that you may go your way, now that you have come to
        your servant."  They said, "Very well, do as you have said."
018:006 Abraham hurried into the tent to Sarah, and said, "Quickly make
        ready three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes."
018:007 Abraham ran to the herd, and fetched a tender and good calf,
        and gave it to the servant.  He hurried to dress it.
018:008 He took butter, milk, and the calf which he had dressed,
        and set it before them.  He stood by them under the tree,
        and they ate.
018:009 They said to him, "Where is Sarah, your wife?
        He said, "See, in the tent."
018:010 He said, "I will certainly return to you when the season
        comes round.  Behold, Sarah your wife will have a son."
        Sarah heard in the tent door, which was behind him.
018:011 Now Abraham and Sarah were old, well advanced in age.
        It had ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women.
018:012 Sarah laughed within herself, saying, "After I have grown old
        will I have pleasure, my lord being old also?"
018:013 Yahweh said to Abraham, "Why did Sarah laugh, saying, 'Will I
        really bear a child, yet I am old?'
018:014 Is anything too hard for Yahweh?  At the set time I will return
        to you, when the season comes round, and Sarah will have a son."
018:015 Then Sarah denied, saying, "I didn't laugh," for she was afraid.
        He said, "No, but you did laugh."
018:016 The men rose up from there, and looked toward Sodom.
        Abraham went with them to see them on their way.
018:017 Yahweh said, "Will I hide from Abraham what I do,
018:018 seeing that Abraham has surely become a great and mighty nation,
        and all the nations of the earth will be blessed in him?
018:019 For I have known him, to the end that he may command his
        children and his household after him, that they may keep
        the way of Yahweh, to do righteousness and justice;
        to the end that Yahweh may bring on Abraham that which he has
        spoken of him."
018:020 Yahweh said, "Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great,
        and because their sin is very grievous,
018:021 I will go down now, and see whether their deeds are as bad
        as the reports which have come to me.  If not, I will know."
018:022 The men turned from there, and went toward Sodom, but Abraham
        stood yet before Yahweh.
018:023 Abraham drew near, and said, "Will you consume the righteous
        with the wicked?
018:024 What if there are fifty righteous within the city?
        Will you consume and not spare the place for the fifty
        righteous who are in it?
018:025 Be it far from you to do things like that, to kill the righteous
        with the wicked, so that the righteous should be like the wicked.
        May that be far from you.  Shouldn't the Judge of all
        the earth do right?"
018:026 Yahweh said, "If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the city,
        then I will spare all the place for their sake."
018:027 Abraham answered, "See now, I have taken it on myself to speak
        to the Lord, who am but dust and ashes.
018:028 What if there will lack five of the fifty righteous?
        Will you destroy all the city for lack of five?"  He said,
        "I will not destroy it, if I find forty-five there."
018:029 He spoke to him yet again, and said, "What if there are forty
        found there?"  He said, "I will not do it for the forty's sake."
018:030 He said, "Oh don't let the Lord be angry, and I will speak.
        What if there are thirty found there?"  He said, "I will not
        do it, if I find thirty there."
018:031 He said, "See now, I have taken it on myself to speak to the Lord.
        What if there are twenty found there?"  He said, "I will not
        destroy it for the twenty's sake."
018:032 He said, "Oh don't let the Lord be angry, and I will
        speak just once more.  What if ten are found there?"
        He said, "I will not destroy it for the ten's sake."
018:033 Yahweh went his way, as soon as he had finished communing
        with Abraham, and Abraham returned to his place.
019:001 The two angels came to Sodom at evening.  Lot sat in the gate
        of Sodom.  Lot saw them, and rose up to meet them.
        He bowed himself with his face to the earth,
019:002 and he said, "See now, my lords, please turn aside into
        your servant's house, stay all night, wash your feet,
        and you will rise up early, and go on your way."
        They said, "No, but we will stay in the street all night."
019:003 He urged them greatly, and they came in with him, and entered
        into his house.  He made them a feast, and baked unleavened bread,
        and they ate.
019:004 But before they lay down, the men of the city, the men of Sodom,
        surrounded the house, both young and old, all the people
        from every quarter.
019:005 They called to Lot, and said to him, "Where are the men
        who came in to you this night?  Bring them out to us,
        that we may have sex with them."
019:006 Lot went out to them to the door, and shut the door after him.
019:007 He said, "Please, my brothers, don't act so wickedly.
019:008 See now, I have two virgin daughters.  Please let me bring them
        out to you, and you may do to them what seems good to you.
        Only don't do anything to these men, because they have come
        under the shadow of my roof."
019:009 They said, "Stand back!"  They said, "This one fellow came
        in to live as a foreigner, and he appoints himself a judge.
        Now will we deal worse with you, than with them!"
        They pressed hard on the man Lot, and drew near to break the door.
019:010 But the men put forth their hand, and brought Lot into the house
        to them, and shut the door.
019:011 They struck the men who were at the door of the house
        with blindness, both small and great, so that they wearied
        themselves to find the door.
019:012 The men said to Lot, "Do you have anybody else here?
        Sons-in-law, your sons, your daughters, and whoever you
        have in the city, bring them out of the place:
019:013 for we will destroy this place, because the outcry against
        them has grown great before Yahweh that Yahweh has sent us
        to destroy it."
019:014 Lot went out, and spoke to his sons-in-law, who were
        pledged to marry his daughters, and said, "Get up!
        Get out of this place, for Yahweh will destroy the city."
        But he seemed to his sons-in-law to be joking.
019:015 When the morning came, then the angels hurried Lot, saying, "Get up!
        Take your wife, and your two daughters who are here,
        lest you be consumed in the iniquity of the city."
019:016 But he lingered; and the men grabbed his hand, his wife's hand,
        and his two daughters' hands, Yahweh being merciful to him;
        and they took him out, and set him outside of the city.
019:017 It came to pass, when they had taken them out, that he said,
        "Escape for your life!  Don't look behind you, and don't
        stay anywhere in the plain.  Escape to the mountains,
        lest you be consumed!"
019:018 Lot said to them, "Oh, not so, my lord.
019:019 See now, your servant has found favor in your sight, and you
        have magnified your loving kindness, which you have shown
        to me in saving my life.  I can't escape to the mountain,
        lest evil overtake me, and I die.
019:020 See now, this city is near to flee to, and it is a little one.
        Oh let me escape there (isn't it a little one?), and my
        soul will live."
019:021 He said to him, "Behold, I have granted your request concerning
        this thing also, that I will not overthrow the city of which
        you have spoken.
019:022 Hurry, escape there, for I can't do anything until you get there."
        Therefore the name of the city was called Zoar.{Zoar means "little."}
019:023 The sun had risen on the earth when Lot came to Zoar.
019:024 Then Yahweh rained on Sodom and on Gomorrah sulfur and fire
        from Yahweh out of the sky.
019:025 He overthrew those cities, all the plain, all the inhabitants
        of the cities, and that which grew on the ground.
019:026 But his wife looked back from behind him, and she became
        a pillar of salt.
019:027 Abraham got up early in the morning to the place where he had
        stood before Yahweh.
019:028 He looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land
        of the plain, and looked, and saw that the smoke of the land
        went up as the smoke of a furnace.
019:029 It happened, when God destroyed the cities of the plain,
        that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the middle
        of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in which Lot lived.
019:030 Lot went up out of Zoar, and lived in the mountain, and his
        two daughters with him; for he was afraid to live in Zoar.
        He lived in a cave with his two daughters.
019:031 The firstborn said to the younger, "Our father is old,
        and there is not a man in the earth to come in to us after
        the manner of all the earth.
019:032 Come, let's make our father drink wine, and we will lie with him,
        that we may preserve our father's seed."
019:033 They made their father drink wine that night:
        and the firstborn went in, and lay with her father.
        He didn't know when she lay down, nor when she arose.
019:034 It came to pass on the next day, that the firstborn said
        to the younger, "Behold, I lay last night with my father.
        Let us make him drink wine again, tonight.  You go in,
        and lie with him, that we may preserve our father's seed."
019:035 They made their father drink wine that night also.
        The younger went and lay with him.  He didn't know when she
        lay down, nor when she got up.
019:036 Thus both of Lot's daughters were with child by their father.
019:037 The firstborn bore a son, and named him Moab.  He is the father
        of the Moabites to this day.
019:038 The younger also bore a son, and called his name Ben Ammi.
        He is the father of the children of Ammon to this day.
020:001 Abraham traveled from there toward the land of the South, and lived
        between Kadesh and Shur.  He lived as a foreigner in Gerar.
020:002 Abraham said about Sarah his wife, "She is my sister."
        Abimelech king of Gerar sent, and took Sarah.
020:003 But God came to Abimelech in a dream of the night, and said
        to him, "Behold, you are a dead man, because of the woman
        whom you have taken.  For she is a man's wife."
020:004 Now Abimelech had not come near her.  He said, "Lord, will you
        kill even a righteous nation?
020:005 Didn't he tell me, 'She is my sister?'  She, even she herself,
        said, 'He is my brother.'  In the integrity of my heart
        and the innocence of my hands have I done this."
020:006 God said to him in the dream, "Yes, I know that in the integrity
        of your heart you have done this, and I also withheld you
        from sinning against me.  Therefore I didn't allow you
        to touch her.
020:007 Now therefore, restore the man's wife.  For he is a prophet,
        and he will pray for you, and you will live.  If you don't
        restore her, know for sure that you will die, you, and all
        who are yours."
020:008 Abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all
        his servants, and told all these things in their ear.
        The men were very scared.
020:009 Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said to him,
        "What have you done to us?  How have I sinned against you,
        that you have brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin?
        You have done deeds to me that ought not to be done!"
020:010 Abimelech said to Abraham, "What did you see, that you have
        done this thing?"
020:011 Abraham said, "Because I thought, 'Surely the fear of God is
        not in this place.  They will kill me for my wife's sake.'
020:012 Besides, she is indeed my sister, the daughter of my father,
        but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife.
020:013 It happened, when God caused me to wander from my father's house,
        that I said to her, 'This is your kindness which you shall show
        to me.  Everywhere that we go, say of me, "He is my brother."'"
020:014 Abimelech took sheep and oxen, male servants and female servants,
        and gave them to Abraham, and restored Sarah, his wife, to him.
020:015 Abimelech said, "Behold, my land is before you.
        Dwell where it pleases you."
020:016 To Sarah he said, "Behold, I have given your brother a thousand
        pieces of silver.  Behold, it is for you a covering of the eyes
        to all that are with you.  In front of all you are vindicated."
020:017 Abraham prayed to God.  God healed Abimelech, and his wife,
        and his female servants, and they bore children.
020:018 For Yahweh had closed up tight all the wombs of the house
        of Abimelech, because of Sarah, Abraham's wife.
021:001 Yahweh visited Sarah as he had said, and Yahweh did to Sarah
        as he had spoken.
021:002 Sarah conceived, and bore Abraham a son in his old age,
        at the set time of which God had spoken to him.
021:003 Abraham called his son who was born to him, whom Sarah bore
        to him, Isaac.{Isaac means "He laughs."}
021:004 Abraham circumcised his son, Isaac, when he was eight days old,
        as God had commanded him.
021:005 Abraham was one hundred years old when his son, Isaac,
        was born to him.
021:006 Sarah said, "God has made me laugh.  Everyone who hears will
        laugh with me."
021:007 She said, "Who would have said to Abraham, that Sarah would
        nurse children?  For I have borne him a son in his old age."
021:008 The child grew, and was weaned.  Abraham made a great feast
        on the day that Isaac was weaned.
021:009 Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, whom she had borne
        to Abraham, mocking.
021:010 Therefore she said to Abraham, "Cast out this handmaid and her son!
        For the son of this handmaid will not be heir with my son, Isaac."
021:011 The thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight on account
        of his son.
021:012 God said to Abraham, "Don't let it be grievous in your
        sight because of the boy, and because of your handmaid.
        In all that Sarah says to you, listen to her voice.
        For from Isaac will your seed be called.
021:013 I will also make a nation of the son of the handmaid,
        because he is your seed."
021:014 Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread and a bottle
        of water, and gave it to Hagar, putting it on her shoulder;
        and gave her the child, and sent her away.  She departed,
        and wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba.
021:015 The water in the bottle was spent, and she cast the child
        under one of the shrubs.
021:016 She went and sat down opposite him, a good way off, about a bow
        shot away.  For she said, "Don't let me see the death of the child."
        She sat over against him, and lifted up her voice, and wept.
021:017 God heard the voice of the boy.  The angel of God called
        to Hagar out of the sky, and said to her, "What ails
        you, Hagar?  Don't be afraid.  For God has heard the voice
        of the boy where he is.
021:018 Get up, lift up the boy, and hold him in your hand.
        For I will make him a great nation."
021:019 God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water.  She went,
        filled the bottle with water, and gave the boy drink.
021:020 God was with the boy, and he grew.  He lived in the wilderness,
        and became, as he grew up, an archer.
021:021 He lived in the wilderness of Paran.  His mother took a wife
        for him out of the land of Egypt.
021:022 It happened at that time, that Abimelech and Phicol the captain
        of his army spoke to Abraham, saying, "God is with you in all
        that you do.
021:023 Now, therefore, swear to me here by God that you will not deal
        falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my son's son.
        But according to the kindness that I have done to you,
        you shall do to me, and to the land in which you have lived
        as a foreigner."
021:024 Abraham said, "I will swear."
021:025 Abraham complained to Abimelech because of a water well,
        which Abimelech's servants had violently taken away.
021:026 Abimelech said, "I don't know who has done this thing.
        Neither did you tell me, neither did I hear of it, until today."
021:027 Abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them to Abimelech.
        Those two made a covenant.
021:028 Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves.
021:029 Abimelech said to Abraham, "What do these seven ewe lambs
        which you have set by themselves mean?"
021:030 He said, "You shall take these seven ewe lambs from my hand,
        that it may be a witness to me, that I have dug this well."
021:031 Therefore he called that place Beersheba,{Beersheba can
        mean "well of the oath" or "well of seven."} because they
        both swore there.
021:032 So they made a covenant at Beersheba.  Abimelech rose up
        with Phicol, the captain of his army, and they returned
        into the land of the Philistines.
021:033 Abraham planted a tamarisk tree in Beersheba, and called there
        on the name of Yahweh, the Everlasting God.
021:034 Abraham lived as a foreigner in the land of the Philistines
        many days.
022:001 It happened after these things, that God tested Abraham,
        and said to him, "Abraham!"  He said, "Here I am."
022:002 He said, "Now take your son, your only son, whom you love,
        even Isaac, and go into the land of Moriah.  Offer him there
        for a burnt offering on one of the mountains which I will
        tell you of."
022:003 Abraham rose early in the morning, and saddled his donkey,
        and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son.
        He split the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up,
        and went to the place of which God had told him.
022:004 On the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw
        the place far off.
022:005 Abraham said to his young men, "Stay here with the donkey.
        The boy and I will go yonder.  We will worship, and come
        back to you."
022:006 Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering and laid it on
        Isaac his son.  He took in his hand the fire and the knife.
        They both went together.
022:007 Isaac spoke to Abraham his father, and said, "My father?"
        He said, "Here I am, my son."  He said, "Here is the fire
        and the wood, but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?"
022:008 Abraham said, "God will provide himself the lamb for a burnt offering,
        my son."  So they both went together.
022:009 They came to the place which God had told him of.
        Abraham built the altar there, and laid the wood in order,
        bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar, on the wood.
022:010 Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to
        kill his son.
022:011 The angel of Yahweh called to him out of the sky, and said,
        "Abraham, Abraham!"  He said, "Here I am."
022:012 He said, "Don't lay your hand on the boy, neither do anything to him.
        For now I know that you fear God, seeing you have not withheld
        your son, your only son, from me."
022:013 Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and saw that behind
        him was a ram caught in the thicket by his horns.
        Abraham went and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt
        offering instead of his son.
022:014 Abraham called the name of that place Yahweh Will Provide{or,
        Yahweh-Jireh, or, Yahweh-Seeing}. As it is said to this day,
        "On Yahweh's mountain, it will be provided."
022:015 The angel of Yahweh called to Abraham a second time out
        of the sky,
022:016 and said, "I have sworn by myself, says Yahweh, because you
        have done this thing, and have not withheld your son,
        your only son,
022:017 that I will bless you greatly, and I will multiply your seed
        greatly like the stars of the heavens, and like the sand
        which is on the seashore.  Your seed will possess the gate
        of his enemies.
022:018 In your seed will all the nations of the earth be blessed,
        because you have obeyed my voice."
022:019 So Abraham returned to his young men, and they rose up and went
        together to Beersheba.  Abraham lived at Beersheba.
022:020 It happened after these things, that it was told Abraham,
        saying, "Behold, Milcah, she also has borne children to
        your brother Nahor:
022:021 Uz his firstborn, Buz his brother, Kemuel the father of Aram,
022:022 Chesed, Hazo, Pildash, Jidlaph, and Bethuel."
022:023 Bethuel became the father of Rebekah.  These eight Milcah bore
        to Nahor, Abraham's brother.
022:024 His concubine, whose name was Reumah, also bore
        Tebah, Gaham, Tahash, and Maacah.
023:001 Sarah lived one hundred twenty-seven years.  This was the length
        of Sarah's life.
023:002 Sarah died in Kiriath Arba (the same is Hebron), in the land
        of Canaan.  Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her.
023:003 Abraham rose up from before his dead, and spoke to the children
        of Heth, saying,
023:004 "I am a stranger and a foreigner living with you.
        Give me a possession of a burying-place with you, that I
        may bury my dead out of my sight."
023:005 The children of Heth answered Abraham, saying to him,
023:006 "Hear us, my lord.  You are a prince of God among us.
        Bury your dead in the best of our tombs.  None of us will
        withhold from you his tomb.  Bury your dead."
023:007 Abraham rose up, and bowed himself to the people of the land,
        even to the children of Heth.
023:008 He talked with them, saying, "If it be your mind that I should
        bury my dead out of my sight, hear me, and entreat for me
        to Ephron the son of Zohar,
023:009 that he may give me the cave of Machpelah, which he has,
        which is in the end of his field.  For the full price let him
        give it to me among you for a possession of a burying-place."
023:010 Now Ephron was sitting in the middle of the children of Heth.
        Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham in the hearing of
        the children of Heth, even of all who went in at the gate
        of his city, saying,
023:011 "No, my lord, hear me.  I give you the field, and I give you
        the cave that is in it.  In the presence of the children
        of my people I give it to you.  Bury your dead."
023:012 Abraham bowed himself down before the people of the land.
023:013 He spoke to Ephron in the audience of the people of
        the land, saying, "But if you will, please hear me.
        I will give the price of the field.  Take it from me,
        and I will bury my dead there."
023:014 Ephron answered Abraham, saying to him,
023:015 "My lord, listen to me.  What is a piece of land worth
        four hundred shekels of silver between me and you?
        Therefore bury your dead."
023:016 Abraham listened to Ephron.  Abraham weighed to Ephron
        the silver which he had named in the audience of the children
        of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, according to the
        current merchants' standard.
023:017 So the field of Ephron, which was in Machpelah, which was
        before Mamre, the field, the cave which was in it,
        and all the trees that were in the field, that were in all
        of its borders, were deeded
023:018 to Abraham for a possession in the presence of the children
        of Heth, before all who went in at the gate of his city.
023:019 After this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave
        of the field of Machpelah before Mamre (that is, Hebron),
        in the land of Canaan.
023:020 The field, and the cave that is in it, were deeded to Abraham
        for a possession of a burying place by the children of Heth.
024:001 Abraham was old, and well stricken in age.  Yahweh had blessed
        Abraham in all things.
024:002 Abraham said to his servant, the elder of his house, who ruled
        over all that he had, "Please put your hand under my thigh.
024:003 I will make you swear by Yahweh, the God of heaven and the God
        of the earth, that you shall not take a wife for my son
        of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I live.
024:004 But you shall go to my country, and to my relatives, and take
        a wife for my son Isaac."
024:005 The servant said to him, "What if the woman isn't willing
        to follow me to this land?  Must I bring your son again
        to the land you came from?"
024:006 Abraham said to him, "Beware that you don't bring my
        son there again.
024:007 Yahweh, the God of heaven, who took me from my father's house,
        and from the land of my birth, who spoke to me, and who swore
        to me, saying, 'I will give this land to your seed{or, offspring}.'
        He will send his angel before you, and you shall take a wife
        for my son from there.
024:008 If the woman isn't willing to follow you, then you shall
        be clear from this my oath.  Only you shall not bring my
        son there again."
024:009 The servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master,
        and swore to him concerning this matter.
024:010 The servant took ten camels, of his master's camels, and departed,
        having a variety of good things of his master's with him.
        He arose, and went to Mesopotamia, to the city of Nahor.
024:011 He made the camels kneel down outside the city by the well
        of water at the time of evening, the time that women go out
        to draw water.
024:012 He said, "Yahweh, the God of my master Abraham, please give me
        success this day, and show kindness to my master Abraham.
024:013 Behold, I am standing by the spring of water.  The daughters
        of the men of the city are coming out to draw water.
024:014 Let it happen, that the young lady to whom I will say,
        'Please let down your pitcher, that I may drink,' and she
        will say, 'Drink, and I will also give your camels a drink,'--
        let her be the one you have appointed for your servant Isaac.
        By this I will know that you have shown kindness to my master."
024:015 It happened, before he had finished speaking, that behold,
        Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel the son of Milcah,
        the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her pitcher
        on her shoulder.
024:016 The young lady was very beautiful to look at, a virgin,
        neither had any man known her.  She went down to the spring,
        filled her pitcher, and came up.
024:017 The servant ran to meet her, and said, "Please give me a drink,
        a little water from your pitcher."
024:018 She said, "Drink, my lord."  She hurried, and let down her
        pitcher on her hand, and gave him drink.
024:019 When she had done giving him drink, she said, "I will also draw
        for your camels, until they have done drinking."
024:020 She hurried, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran
        again to the well to draw, and drew for all his camels.
024:021 The man looked steadfastly at her, remaining silent, to know
        whether Yahweh had made his journey prosperous or not.
024:022 It happened, as the camels had done drinking, that the man
        took a golden ring of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets
        for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold,
024:023 and said, "Whose daughter are you?  Please tell me.
        Is there room in your father's house for us to lodge in?"
024:024 She said to him, "I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah,
        whom she bore to Nahor."
024:025 She said moreover to him, "We have both straw and provender enough,
        and room to lodge in."
024:026 The man bowed his head, and worshiped Yahweh.
024:027 He said, "Blessed be Yahweh, the God of my master Abraham, who has
        not forsaken his loving kindness and his truth toward my master.
        As for me, Yahweh has led me in the way to the house of
        my master's relatives."
024:028 The young lady ran, and told her mother's house about these words.
024:029 Rebekah had a brother, and his name was Laban.  Laban ran
        out to the man, to the spring.
024:030 It happened, when he saw the ring, and the bracelets on his
        sister's hands, and when he heard the words of Rebekah
        his sister, saying, "This is what the man said to me,"
        that he came to the man.  Behold, he was standing by the camels
        at the spring.
024:031 He said, "Come in, you blessed of Yahweh.  Why do you stand outside?
        For I have prepared the house, and room for the camels."
024:032 The man came into the house, and he unloaded the camels.
        He gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash
        his feet and the feet of the men who were with him.
024:033 Food was set before him to eat, but he said, "I will not eat
        until I have told my message."  He said, "Speak on."
024:034 He said, "I am Abraham's servant.
024:035 Yahweh has blessed my master greatly.  He has become great.
        He has given him flocks and herds, silver and gold,
        male servants and female servants, and camels and donkeys.
024:036 Sarah, my master's wife, bore a son to my master when she was old.
        He has given all that he has to him.
024:037 My master made me swear, saying, 'You shall not take a wife
        for my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, in whose
        land I live,
024:038 but you shall go to my father's house, and to my relatives,
        and take a wife for my son.'
024:039 I said to my master, 'What if the woman will not follow me?'
024:040 He said to me, 'Yahweh, before whom I walk, will send his
        angel with you, and prosper your way.  You shall take a wife
        for my son of my relatives, and of my father's house.
024:041 Then will you be clear from my oath, when you come to my relatives.
        If they don't give her to you, you shall be clear from my oath.'
024:042 I came this day to the spring, and said, 'Yahweh, the God
        of my master Abraham, if now you do prosper my way which I go--
024:043 behold, I am standing by this spring of water.  Let it happen,
        that the maiden who comes forth to draw, to whom I will say,
        "Give me, I pray you, a little water from your pitcher to drink,"
024:044 and she will tell me, "Drink, and I will also draw for
        your camels,"--let her be the woman whom Yahweh has appointed
        for my master's son.'
024:045 Before I had done speaking in my heart, behold, Rebekah came forth
        with her pitcher on her shoulder.  She went down to the spring,
        and drew.  I said to her, 'Please let me drink.'
024:046 She hurried and let down her pitcher from her shoulder,
        and said, 'Drink, and I will also give your camels a drink.'
        So I drank, and she made the camels drink also.
024:047 I asked her, and said, 'Whose daughter are you?'  She said,
        'The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom Milcah bore to him.'
        I put the ring on her nose, and the bracelets on her hands.
024:048 I bowed my head, and worshiped Yahweh, and blessed Yahweh,
        the God of my master Abraham, who had led me in the right way
        to take my master's brother's daughter for his son.
024:049 Now if you will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me.
        If not, tell me, that I may turn to the right hand,
        or to the left."
024:050 Then Laban and Bethuel answered, "The thing proceeds from Yahweh.
        We can't speak to you bad or good.
024:051 Behold, Rebekah is before you.  Take her, and go, and let
        her be your master's son's wife, as Yahweh has spoken."
024:052 It happened that when Abraham's servant heard their words,
        he bowed himself down to the earth to Yahweh.
024:053 The servant brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of gold,
        and clothing, and gave them to Rebekah.  He also gave precious
        things to her brother and her mother.
024:054 They ate and drank, he and the men who were with him,
        and stayed all night.  They rose up in the morning, and he said,
        "Send me away to my master."
024:055 Her brother and her mother said, "Let the young lady stay
        with us a few days, at least ten.  After that she will go."
024:056 He said to them, "Don't hinder me, seeing Yahweh has prospered
        my way.  Send me away that I may go to my master."
024:057 They said, "We will call the young lady, and ask her."
024:058 They called Rebekah, and said to her, "Will you go with this man?"
        She said, "I will go."
024:059 They sent away Rebekah, their sister, with her nurse,
        Abraham's servant, and his men.
024:060 They blessed Rebekah, and said to her, "Our sister, may you
        be the mother of thousands of ten thousands, and let your seed
        possess the gate of those who hate them."
024:061 Rebekah arose with her ladies.  They rode on the camels,
        and followed the man.  The servant took Rebekah, and went his way.
024:062 Isaac came from the way of Beer Lahai Roi, for he lived
        in the land of the South.
024:063 Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the evening.
        He lifted up his eyes, and saw, and, behold, there
        were camels coming.
024:064 Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw Isaac,
        she dismounted from the camel.
024:065 She said to the servant, "Who is the man who is walking in
        the field to meet us?"  The servant said, "It is my master."
        She took her veil, and covered herself.
024:066 The servant told Isaac all the things that he had done.
024:067 Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah's tent,
        and took Rebekah, and she became his wife.  He loved her.
        Isaac was comforted after his mother's death.
025:001 Abraham took another wife, and her name was Keturah.
025:002 She bore him Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, and Shuah.
025:003 Jokshan became the father of Sheba, and Dedan.  The sons
        of Dedan were Asshurim, Letushim, and Leummim.
025:004 The sons of Midian:  Ephah, Epher, Hanoch, Abida, and Eldaah.
        All these were the children of Keturah.
025:005 Abraham gave all that he had to Isaac,
025:006 but to the sons of Abraham's concubines, Abraham gave gifts.
        He sent them away from Isaac his son, while he yet lived,
        eastward, to the east country.
025:007 These are the days of the years of Abraham's life which he lived:
        one hundred seventy-five years.
025:008 Abraham gave up the spirit, and died in a good old age,
        an old man, and full of years, and was gathered to his people.
025:009 Isaac and Ishmael, his sons, buried him in the cave of Machpelah,
        in the field of Ephron, the son of Zohar the Hittite,
        which is before Mamre,
025:010 the field which Abraham purchased of the children of Heth.
        Abraham was buried there with Sarah, his wife.
025:011 It happened after the death of Abraham that God blessed Isaac,
        his son.  Isaac lived by Beer Lahai Roi.
025:012 Now this is the history of the generations of Ishmael, Abraham's son,
        whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's handmaid, bore to Abraham.
025:013 These are the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names,
        according to the order of their birth:  the firstborn
        of Ishmael, Nebaioth, then Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam,
025:014 Mishma, Dumah, Massa,
025:015 Hadad, Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah.
025:016 These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names,
        by their villages, and by their encampments:  twelve princes,
        according to their nations.
025:017 These are the years of the life of Ishmael:  one hundred
        thirty-seven years.  He gave up the spirit and died,
        and was gathered to his people.
025:018 They lived from Havilah to Shur that is before Egypt, as you
        go toward Assyria.  He lived opposite all his relatives.
025:019 This is the history of the generations of Isaac, Abraham's son.
        Abraham became the father of Isaac.
025:020 Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah, the daughter
        of Bethuel the Syrian of Paddan Aram, the sister of Laban
        the Syrian, to be his wife.
025:021 Isaac entreated Yahweh for his wife, because she was barren.
        Yahweh was entreated by him, and Rebekah his wife conceived.
025:022 The children struggled together within her.  She said,
        "If it be so, why do I live?"  She went to inquire of Yahweh.
025:023 Yahweh said to her, Two nations are in your womb.
        Two peoples will be separated from your body.
        The one people will be stronger than the other people.
        The elder will serve the younger.
025:024 When her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there were
        twins in her womb.
025:025 The first came out red all over, like a hairy garment.
        They named him Esau.
025:026 After that, his brother came out, and his hand had hold on
        Esau's heel.  He was named Jacob.  Isaac was sixty years old
        when she bore them.
025:027 The boys grew.  Esau was a skillful hunter, a man of the field.
        Jacob was a quiet man, living in tents.
025:028 Now Isaac loved Esau, because he ate his venison.
        Rebekah loved Jacob.
025:029 Jacob boiled stew.  Esau came in from the field,
        and he was famished.
025:030 Esau said to Jacob, "Please feed me with that same red stew,
        for I am famished."  Therefore his name was called Edom.
025:031 Jacob said, "First, sell me your birthright."
025:032 Esau said, "Behold, I am about to die.  What good is the
        birthright to me?"
025:033 Jacob said, "Swear to me first."  He swore to him.
        He sold his birthright to Jacob.
025:034 Jacob gave Esau bread and stew of lentils.  He ate and drank,
        rose up, and went his way.  So Esau despised his birthright.
026:001 There was a famine in the land, besides the first famine
        that was in the days of Abraham.  Isaac went to Abimelech
        king of the Philistines, to Gerar.
026:002 Yahweh appeared to him, and said, "Don't go down into Egypt.
        Live in the land I will tell you about.
026:003 Sojourn in this land, and I will be with you, and will bless you.
        For to you, and to your seed, I will give all these lands, and I
        will establish the oath which I swore to Abraham your father.
026:004 I will multiply your seed as the stars of the sky, and will
        give to your seed all these lands.  In your seed will all
        the nations of the earth be blessed,
026:005 because Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge,
        my commandments, my statutes, and my laws."
026:006 Isaac lived in Gerar.
026:007 The men of the place asked him about his wife.  He said,
        "She is my sister," for he was afraid to say, "My wife,"
        lest, he thought, "the men of the place might kill me for Rebekah,
        because she is beautiful to look at."
026:008 It happened, when he had been there a long time, that Abimelech
        king of the Philistines looked out at a window, and saw,
        and, behold, Isaac was caressing Rebekah, his wife.
026:009 Abimelech called Isaac, and said, "Behold, surely she is your wife.
        Why did you say, 'She is my sister?'"  Isaac said to him,
        "Because I said, 'Lest I die because of her.'"
026:010 Abimelech said, "What is this you have done to us?
        One of the people might easily have lain with your wife,
        and you would have brought guilt on us!"
026:011 Abimelech charged all the people, saying, "He who touches this
        man or his wife will surely be put to death."
026:012 Isaac sowed in that land, and reaped in the same year one
        hundred times what he planted.  Yahweh blessed him.
026:013 The man grew great, and grew more and more until he
        became very great.
026:014 He had possessions of flocks, possessions of herds,
        and a great household.  The Philistines envied him.
026:015 Now all the wells which his father's servants had dug in
        the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines had stopped,
        and filled with earth.
026:016 Abimelech said to Isaac, "Go from us, for you are much
        mightier than we."
026:017 Isaac departed from there, encamped in the valley of Gerar,
        and lived there.
026:018 Isaac dug again the wells of water, which they had dug in the days
        of Abraham his father.  For the Philistines had stopped them
        after the death of Abraham.  He called their names after
        the names by which his father had called them.
026:019 Isaac's servants dug in the valley, and found there a well
        of springing water.
026:020 The herdsmen of Gerar argued with Isaac's herdsmen, saying,
        "The water is ours."  He called the name of the well Esek,
        because they contended with him.
026:021 They dug another well, and they argued over that, also.
        He called the name of it Sitnah.
026:022 He left that place, and dug another well.  They didn't
        argue over that one.  He called it Rehoboth.  He said,
        "For now Yahweh has made room for us, and we will be fruitful
        in the land."
026:023 He went up from there to Beersheba.
026:024 Yahweh appeared to him the same night, and said, "I am
        the God of Abraham your father.  Don't be afraid, for I am
        with you, and will bless you, and multiply your seed for my
        servant Abraham's sake."
026:025 He built an altar there, and called on the name of Yahweh,
        and pitched his tent there.  There Isaac's servants dug a well.
026:026 Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar, and Ahuzzath his friend,
        and Phicol the captain of his army.
026:027 Isaac said to them, "Why have you come to me, since you hate me,
        and have sent me away from you?"
026:028 They said, "We saw plainly that Yahweh was with you.
        We said, 'Let there now be an oath between us, even between us
        and you, and let us make a covenant with you,
026:029 that you will do us no harm, as we have not touched you,
        and as we have done to you nothing but good, and have sent
        you away in peace.'  You are now the blessed of Yahweh."
026:030 He made them a feast, and they ate and drank.
026:031 They rose up some time in the morning, and swore one to another.
        Isaac sent them away, and they departed from him in peace.
026:032 It happened the same day, that Isaac's servants came, and told
        him concerning the well which they had dug, and said to him,
        "We have found water."
026:033 He called it Shibah.{Shibah means "oath" or "seven."} Therefore
        the name of the city is Beersheba{Beersheba means "well of the oath"
        or "well of the seven"} to this day.
026:034 When Esau was forty years old, he took as wife Judith,
        the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Basemath, the daughter
        of Elon the Hittite.
026:035 They grieved Isaac's and Rebekah's spirits.
027:001 It happened, that when Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim,
        so that he could not see, he called Esau his elder son,
        and said to him, "My son?"  He said to him, "Here I am."
027:002 He said, "See now, I am old.  I don't know the day of my death.
027:003 Now therefore, please take your weapons, your quiver and your bow,
        and go out to the field, and take me venison.
027:004 Make me savory food, such as I love, and bring it to me,
        that I may eat, and that my soul may bless you before I die."
027:005 Rebekah heard when Isaac spoke to Esau his son.
        Esau went to the field to hunt for venison, and to bring it.
027:006 Rebekah spoke to Jacob her son, saying, "Behold, I heard
        your father speak to Esau your brother, saying,
027:007 'Bring me venison, and make me savory food, that I may eat,
        and bless you before Yahweh before my death.'
027:008 Now therefore, my son, obey my voice according to that which
        I command you.
027:009 Go now to the flock, and get me from there two good kids
        of the goats.  I will make them savory food for your father,
        such as he loves.
027:010 You shall bring it to your father, that he may eat, so that
        he may bless you before his death."
027:011 Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, "Behold, Esau my brother
        is a hairy man, and I am a smooth man.
027:012 What if my father touches me?  I will seem to him as a deceiver,
        and I would bring a curse on myself, and not a blessing."
027:013 His mother said to him, "Let your curse be on me, my son.
        Only obey my voice, and go get them for me."
027:014 He went, and got them, and brought them to his mother.
        His mother made savory food, such as his father loved.
027:015 Rebekah took the good clothes of Esau, her elder son,
        which were with her in the house, and put them on Jacob,
        her younger son.
027:016 She put the skins of the kids of the goats on his hands,
        and on the smooth of his neck.
027:017 She gave the savory food and the bread, which she had prepared,
        into the hand of her son Jacob.
027:018 He came to his father, and said, "My father?"  He said, "Here I am.
        Who are you, my son?"
027:019 Jacob said to his father, "I am Esau your firstborn.
        I have done what you asked me to do.  Please arise, sit and eat
        of my venison, that your soul may bless me."
027:020 Isaac said to his son, "How is it that you have found it so quickly,
        my son?"  He said, "Because Yahweh your God gave me success."
027:021 Isaac said to Jacob, "Please come near, that I may feel you,
        my son, whether you are really my son Esau or not."
027:022 Jacob went near to Isaac his father.  He felt him, and said,
        "The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau."
027:023 He didn't recognize him, because his hands were hairy,
        like his brother, Esau's hands.  So he blessed him.
027:024 He said, "Are you really my son Esau?"  He said, "I am."
027:025 He said, "Bring it near to me, and I will eat of my son's venison,
        that my soul may bless you."  He brought it near to him, and he ate.
        He brought him wine, and he drank.
027:026 His father Isaac said to him, "Come near now, and kiss me, my son."
027:027 He came near, and kissed him.  He smelled the smell of his clothing,
        and blessed him, and said, "Behold, the smell of my son
        is as the smell of a field which Yahweh has blessed.
027:028 God give you of the dew of the sky, of the fatness of the earth,
        and plenty of grain and new wine.
027:029 Let peoples serve you, and nations bow down to you.
        Be lord over your brothers.  Let your mother's sons
        bow down to you.  Cursed be everyone who curses you.
        Blessed be everyone who blesses you."
027:030 It happened, as soon as Isaac had made an end of blessing Jacob,
        and Jacob had just gone out from the presence of Isaac his father,
        that Esau his brother came in from his hunting.
027:031 He also made savory food, and brought it to his father.
        He said to his father, "Let my father arise, and eat of his
        son's venison, that your soul may bless me."
027:032 Isaac his father said to him, "Who are you?"  He said,
        "I am your son, your firstborn, Esau."
027:033 Isaac trembled violently, and said, "Who, then, is he who has
        taken venison, and brought it me, and I have eaten of all before
        you came, and have blessed him?  Yes, he will be blessed."
027:034 When Esau heard the words of his father, he cried with an
        exceeding great and bitter cry, and said to his father,
        "Bless me, even me also, my father."
027:035 He said, "Your brother came with deceit, and has taken
        away your blessing."
027:036 He said, "Isn't he rightly named Jacob?  For he has
        supplanted me these two times.  He took away my birthright.
        See, now he has taken away my blessing."  He said, "Haven't you
        reserved a blessing for me?"
027:037 Isaac answered Esau, "Behold, I have made him your lord,
        and all his brothers have I given to him for servants.
        With grain and new wine have I sustained him.  What then
        will I do for you, my son?"
027:038 Esau said to his father, "Have you but one blessing, my father?
        Bless me, even me also, my father."  Esau lifted up
        his voice, and wept.
027:039 Isaac his father answered him, "Behold, of the fatness of the earth
        will be your dwelling, and of the dew of the sky from above.
027:040 By your sword will you live, and you will serve your brother.
        It will happen, when you will break loose, that you shall
        shake his yoke from off your neck."
027:041 Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing with which his father
        blessed him.  Esau said in his heart, "The days of mourning
        for my father are at hand.  Then I will kill my brother Jacob."
027:042 The words of Esau, her elder son, were told to Rebekah.
        She sent and called Jacob, her younger son, and said
        to him, "Behold, your brother Esau comforts himself about you
        by planning to kill you.
027:043 Now therefore, my son, obey my voice.  Arise, flee to Laban,
        my brother, in Haran.
027:044 Stay with him a few days, until your brother's fury turns away;
027:045 until your brother's anger turn away from you, and he forgets what
        you have done to him.  Then I will send, and get you from there.
        Why should I be bereaved of you both in one day?"
027:046 Rebekah said to Isaac, "I am weary of my life because of
        the daughters of Heth.  If Jacob takes a wife of the daughters
        of Heth, such as these, of the daughters of the land,
        what good will my life do me?"
028:001 Isaac called Jacob, blessed him, and commanded him, "You shall
        not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan.
028:002 Arise, go to Paddan Aram, to the house of Bethuel your
        mother's father.  Take a wife from there from the daughters
        of Laban, your mother's brother.
028:003 May God Almighty bless you, and make you fruitful, and multiply you,
        that you may be a company of peoples,
028:004 and give you the blessing of Abraham, to you, and to your seed
        with you, that you may inherit the land where you travel,
        which God gave to Abraham."
028:005 Isaac sent Jacob away.  He went to Paddan Aram to Laban, son of
        Bethuel the Syrian, Rebekah's brother, Jacob's and Esau's mother.
028:006 Now Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and sent him away
        to Paddan Aram, to take him a wife from there, and that as
        he blessed him he gave him a charge, saying, "You shall not
        take a wife of the daughters of Canaan,"
028:007 and that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother, and was gone
        to Paddan Aram.
028:008 Esau saw that the daughters of Canaan didn't please Isaac,
        his father.
028:009 Esau went to Ishmael, and took, besides the wives that he had,
        Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael, Abraham's son, the sister
        of Nebaioth, to be his wife.
028:010 Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went toward Haran.
028:011 He came to a certain place, and stayed there all night,
        because the sun had set.  He took one of the stones of the place,
        and put it under his head, and lay down in that place to sleep.
028:012 He dreamed.  Behold, a stairway set upon the earth, and the top
        of it reached to heaven.  Behold, the angels of God ascending
        and descending on it.
028:013 Behold, Yahweh stood above it, and said, "I am Yahweh,
        the God of Abraham your father, and the God of Isaac.
        The land whereon you lie, to you will I give it, and to your seed.
028:014 Your seed will be as the dust of the earth, and you will spread
        abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north,
        and to the south.  In you and in your seed will all the families
        of the earth be blessed.
028:015 Behold, I am with you, and will keep you, wherever you go,
        and will bring you again into this land.  For I will not leave you,
        until I have done that which I have spoken of to you."
028:016 Jacob awakened out of his sleep, and he said, "Surely Yahweh
        is in this place, and I didn't know it."
028:017 He was afraid, and said, "How dreadful is this place!
        This is none other than God's house, and this is the
        gate of heaven."
028:018 Jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone
        that he had put under his head, and set it up for a pillar,
        and poured oil on the top of it.
028:019 He called the name of that place Bethel, but the name of the city
        was Luz at the first.
028:020 Jacob vowed a vow, saying, "If God will be with me, and will
        keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat,
        and clothing to put on,
028:021 so that I come again to my father's house in peace, and Yahweh
        will be my God,
028:022 then this stone, which I have set up for a pillar, will be
        God's house.  Of all that you will give me I will surely give
        the tenth to you."
029:001 Then Jacob went on his journey, and came to the land of
        the children of the east.
029:002 He looked, and behold, a well in the field, and, behold, three flocks
        of sheep lying there by it.  For out of that well they watered
        the flocks.  The stone on the well's mouth was large.
029:003 There all the flocks were gathered.  They rolled the stone
        from the well's mouth, and watered the sheep, and put the stone
        again on the well's mouth in its place.
029:004 Jacob said to them, "My relatives, where are you from?"
        They said, "We are from Haran."
029:005 He said to them, "Do you know Laban, the son of Nahor?"  They said,
        "We know him."
029:006 He said to them, "Is it well with him?"  They said, "It is well.
        See, Rachel, his daughter, is coming with the sheep."
029:007 He said, "Behold, it is still the middle of the day,
        not time to gather the livestock together.  Water the sheep,
        and go and feed them."
029:008 They said, "We can't, until all the flocks are gathered
        together, and they roll the stone from the well's mouth.
        Then we water the sheep."
029:009 While he was yet speaking with them, Rachel came with her
        father's sheep, for she kept them.
029:010 It happened, when Jacob saw Rachel the daughter of Laban,
        his mother's brother, and the sheep of Laban, his mother's brother,
        that Jacob went near, and rolled the stone from the well's mouth,
        and watered the flock of Laban his mother's brother.
029:011 Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept.
029:012 Jacob told Rachel that he was her father's brother, and that
        he was Rebekah's son.  She ran and told her father.
029:013 It happened, when Laban heard the news of Jacob, his sister's son,
        that he ran to meet Jacob, and embraced him, and kissed him,
        and brought him to his house.  Jacob told Laban all these things.
029:014 Laban said to him, Surely you are my bone and my flesh.
        He lived with him for a month.
029:015 Laban said to Jacob, "Because you are my brother, should you
        therefore serve me for nothing?  Tell me, what will
        your wages be?"
029:016 Laban had two daughters.  The name of the elder was Leah,
        and the name of the younger was Rachel.
029:017 Leah's eyes were weak, but Rachel was beautiful in
        form and attractive.
029:018 Jacob loved Rachel.  He said, "I will serve you seven years
        for Rachel, your younger daughter."
029:019 Laban said, "It is better that I give her to you, than that I
        should give her to another man.  Stay with me."
029:020 Jacob served seven years for Rachel.  They seemed to him
        but a few days, for the love he had for her.
029:021 Jacob said to Laban, "Give me my wife, for my days are fulfilled,
        that I may go in to her."
029:022 Laban gathered together all the men of the place, and made a feast.
029:023 It happened in the evening, that he took Leah his daughter,
        and brought her to him.  He went in to her.
029:024 Laban gave Zilpah his handmaid to his daughter Leah for a handmaid.
029:025 It happened in the morning that, behold, it was Leah.
        He said to Laban, "What is this you have done to me?
        Didn't I serve with you for Rachel?  Why then have
        you deceived me?"
029:026 Laban said, "It is not done so in our place, to give the younger
        before the firstborn.
029:027 Fulfill the week of this one, and we will give you the other
        also for the service which you will serve with me yet
        seven other years."
029:028 Jacob did so, and fulfilled her week.  He gave him Rachel
        his daughter as wife.
029:029 Laban gave to Rachel his daughter Bilhah, his handmaid,
        to be her handmaid.
029:030 He went in also to Rachel, and he loved also Rachel more than Leah,
        and served with him yet seven other years.
029:031 Yahweh saw that Leah was hated, and he opened her womb,
        but Rachel was barren.
029:032 Leah conceived, and bore a son, and she named him Reuben.
        For she said, "Because Yahweh has looked at my affliction.
        For now my husband will love me."
029:033 She conceived again, and bore a son, and said, "Because Yahweh has
        heard that I am hated, he has therefore given me this son also."
        She named him Simeon.
029:034 She conceived again, and bore a son.  Said, "Now this time will my
        husband be joined to me, because I have borne him three sons."
        Therefore was his name called Levi.
029:035 She conceived again, and bore a son.  She said, "This time
        will I praise Yahweh."  Therefore she named him Judah.
        Then she stopped bearing.
030:001 When Rachel saw that she bore Jacob no children, Rachel envied
        her sister.  She said to Jacob, "Give me children, or else
        I will die."
030:002 Jacob's anger was kindled against Rachel, and he said,
        "Am I in God's place, who has withheld from you the fruit
        of the womb?"
030:003 She said, "Behold, my maid Bilhah.  Go in to her, that she
        may bear on my knees, and I also may obtain children by her."
030:004 She gave him Bilhah her handmaid as wife, and Jacob went
        in to her.
030:005 Bilhah conceived, and bore Jacob a son.
030:006 Rachel said, "God has judged me, and has also heard my voice,
        and has given me a son."  Therefore called she his name Dan.
030:007 Bilhah, Rachel's handmaid, conceived again, and bore Jacob
        a second son.
030:008 Rachel said, "With mighty wrestlings have I wrestled with my sister,
        and have prevailed."  She named him Naphtali.
030:009 When Leah saw that she had finished bearing, she took Zilpah,
        her handmaid, and gave her to Jacob as a wife.
030:010 Zilpah, Leah's handmaid, bore Jacob a son.
030:011 Leah said, "How fortunate!"  She named him Gad.
030:012 Zilpah, Leah's handmaid, bore Jacob a second son.
030:013 Leah said, "Happy am I, for the daughters will call me happy."
        She named him Asher.
030:014 Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found mandrakes
        in the field, and brought them to his mother, Leah.  Then Rachel
        said to Leah, "Please give me some of your son's mandrakes."
030:015 She said to her, "Is it a small matter that you have taken away
        my husband?  Would you take away my son's mandrakes, also?"
        Rachel said, "Therefore he will lie with you tonight for
        your son's mandrakes."
030:016 Jacob came from the field in the evening, and Leah went
        out to meet him, and said, "You must come in to me;
        for I have surely hired you with my son's mandrakes."
        He lay with her that night.
030:017 God listened to Leah, and she conceived, and bore Jacob
        a fifth son.
030:018 Leah said, "God has given me my hire, because I gave my handmaid
        to my husband."  She named him Issachar.
030:019 Leah conceived again, and bore a sixth son to Jacob.
030:020 Leah said, "God has endowed me with a good dowry.  Now my
        husband will live with me, because I have borne him six sons."
        She named him Zebulun.
030:021 Afterwards, she bore a daughter, and named her Dinah.
030:022 God remembered Rachel, and God listened to her, and opened her womb.
030:023 She conceived, bore a son, and said, "God has taken
        away my reproach."
030:024 She named him Joseph,{Joseph means "may he add."} saying,
        "May Yahweh add another son to me."
030:025 It happened, when Rachel had borne Joseph, that Jacob said
        to Laban, "Send me away, that I may go to my own place,
        and to my country.
030:026 Give me my wives and my children for whom I have served you,
        and let me go; for you know my service with which I
        have served you."
030:027 Laban said to him, "If now I have found favor in your eyes,
        stay here, for I have divined that Yahweh has blessed me
        for your sake."
030:028 He said, "Appoint me your wages, and I will give it."
030:029 He said to him, "You know how I have served you, and how your
        livestock have fared with me.
030:030 For it was little which you had before I came, and it has increased
        to a multitude.  Yahweh has blessed you wherever I turned.
        Now when will I provide for my own house also?"
030:031 He said, "What shall I give you?"  Jacob said, "You shall
        not give me anything.  If you will do this thing for me,
        I will again feed your flock and keep it.
030:032 I will pass through all your flock today, removing from there
        every speckled and spotted one, and every black one among
        the sheep, and the spotted and speckled among the goats.
        This will be my hire.
030:033 So my righteousness will answer for me hereafter,
        when you come concerning my hire that is before you.
        Every one that is not speckled and spotted among the goats,
        and black among the sheep, that might be with me,
        will be counted stolen."
030:034 Laban said, "Behold, I desire it to be according to your word."
030:035 That day, he removed the male goats that were streaked and spotted,
        and all the female goats that were speckled and spotted,
        every one that had white in it, and all the black ones among
        the sheep, and gave them into the hand of his sons.
030:036 He set three days' journey between himself and Jacob,
        and Jacob fed the rest of Laban's flocks.
030:037 Jacob took to himself rods of fresh poplar, almond, plane tree,
        peeled white streaks in them, and made the white appear
        which was in the rods.
030:038 He set the rods which he had peeled opposite the flocks in the
        gutters in the watering-troughs where the flocks came to drink.
        They conceived when they came to drink.
030:039 The flocks conceived before the rods, and the flocks brought
        forth streaked, speckled, and spotted.
030:040 Jacob separated the lambs, and set the faces of the flocks
        toward the streaked and all the black in the flock of Laban:
        and he put his own droves apart, and didn't put them
        into Laban's flock.
030:041 It happened, whenever the stronger of the flock conceived,
        that Jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the flock
        in the gutters, that they might conceive among the rods;
030:042 but when the flock were feeble, he didn't put them in.
        So the feebler were Laban's, and the stronger Jacob's.
030:043 The man increased exceedingly, and had large flocks,
        female servants and male servants, and camels and donkeys.
031:001 He heard the words of Laban's sons, saying, "Jacob has taken away
        all that was our father's. From that which was our father's,
        has he gotten all this wealth."
031:002 Jacob saw the expression on Laban's face, and, behold, it was
        not toward him as before.
031:003 Yahweh said to Jacob, "Return to the land of your fathers,
        and to your relatives, and I will be with you."
031:004 Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field to his flock,
031:005 and said to them, "I see the expression on your father's face,
        that it is not toward me as before; but the God of my father
        has been with me.
031:006 You know that I have served your father with all of my strength.
031:007 Your father has deceived me, and changed my wages ten times,
        but God didn't allow him to hurt me.
031:008 If he said this, 'The speckled will be your wages,' then all
        the flock bore speckled.  If he said this, 'The streaked
        will be your wages,' then all the flock bore streaked.
031:009 Thus God has taken away your father's livestock, and given
        them to me.
031:010 It happened during mating season that I lifted up my eyes,
        and saw in a dream, and behold, the male goats which leaped
        on the flock were streaked, speckled, and grizzled.
031:011 The angel of God said to me in the dream, 'Jacob,' and I said,
        'Here I am.'
031:012 He said, 'Now lift up your eyes, and behold, all the male goats
        which leap on the flock are streaked, speckled, and grizzled,
        for I have seen all that Laban does to you.
031:013 I am the God of Bethel, where you anointed a pillar, where you
        vowed a vow to me.  Now arise, get out from this land,
        and return to the land of your birth.'"
031:014 Rachel and Leah answered him, "Is there yet any portion
        or inheritance for us in our father's house?
031:015 Aren't we accounted by him as foreigners?  For he has sold us,
        and has also quite devoured our money.
031:016 For all the riches which God has taken away from our father,
        that is ours and our children's. Now then, whatever God has
        said to you, do."
031:017 Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives on the camels,
031:018 and he took away all his livestock, and all his possessions
        which he had gathered, including the livestock which
        he had gained in Paddan Aram, to go to Isaac his father,
        to the land of Canaan.
031:019 Now Laban had gone to shear his sheep:  and Rachel stole
        the teraphim{teraphim were household idols that may have been
        associated with inheritance rights to the household property.}
        that were her father's.
031:020 Jacob deceived Laban the Syrian, in that he didn't tell him
        that he was running away.
031:021 So he fled with all that he had.  He rose up, passed over the River,
        and set his face toward the mountain of Gilead.
031:022 Laban was told on the third day that Jacob had fled.
031:023 He took his relatives with him, and pursued after him
        seven days' journey.  He overtook him in the mountain of Gilead.
031:024 God came to Laban, the Syrian, in a dream of the night,
        and said to him, "Take heed to yourself that you don't speak
        to Jacob either good or bad."
031:025 Laban caught up with Jacob.  Now Jacob had pitched his tent
        in the mountain, and Laban with his relatives encamped
        in the mountain of Gilead.
031:026 Laban said to Jacob, "What have you done, that you have deceived me,
        and carried away my daughters like captives of the sword?
031:027 Why did you flee secretly, and deceive me, and didn't tell me,
        that I might have sent you away with mirth and with songs,
        with tambourine and with harp;
031:028 and didn't allow me to kiss my sons and my daughters?
        Now have you done foolishly.
031:029 It is in the power of my hand to hurt you, but the God of your
        father spoke to me last night, saying, 'Take heed to yourself
        that you don't speak to Jacob either good or bad.'
031:030 Now, you want to be gone, because you greatly longed for your
        father's house, but why have you stolen my gods?"
031:031 Jacob answered Laban, "Because I was afraid, for I said,
        'Lest you should take your daughters from me by force.'
031:032 Anyone you find your gods with shall not live.
        Before our relatives, discern what is yours with me, and take it."
        For Jacob didn't know that Rachel had stolen them.
031:033 Laban went into Jacob's tent, into Leah's tent, and into
        the tent of the two female servants; but he didn't find them.
        He went out of Leah's tent, and entered into Rachel's tent.
031:034 Now Rachel had taken the teraphim, put them in the camel's
        saddle, and sat on them.  Laban felt about all the tent,
        but didn't find them.
031:035 She said to her father, "Don't let my lord be angry that I
        can't rise up before you; for the manner of women is on me."
        He searched, but didn't find the teraphim.
031:036 Jacob was angry, and argued with Laban.  Jacob answered
        Laban, "What is my trespass?  What is my sin, that you have
        hotly pursued after me?
031:037 Now that you have felt around in all my stuff, what have you found
        of all your household stuff?  Set it here before my relatives
        and your relatives, that they may judge between us two.
031:038 These twenty years I have been with you.  Your ewes and your
        female goats have not cast their young, and I haven't eaten
        the rams of your flocks.
031:039 That which was torn of animals, I didn't bring to you.
        I bore the loss of it.  Of my hand you required it,
        whether stolen by day or stolen by night.
031:040 This was my situation:  in the day the drought consumed me,
        and the frost by night; and my sleep fled from my eyes.
031:041 These twenty years I have been in your house.  I served you fourteen
        years for your two daughters, and six years for your flock,
        and you have changed my wages ten times.
031:042 Unless the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the fear
        of Isaac, had been with me, surely now you would have sent me
        away empty.  God has seen my affliction and the labor of my hands,
        and rebuked you last night."
031:043 Laban answered Jacob, "The daughters are my daughters,
        the children are my children, the flocks are my flocks,
        and all that you see is mine:  and what can I do this day to
        these my daughters, or to their children whom they have borne?
031:044 Now come, let us make a covenant, you and I; and let it be
        for a witness between me and you."
031:045 Jacob took a stone, and set it up for a pillar.
031:046 Jacob said to his relatives, "Gather stones."  They took stones,
        and made a heap.  They ate there by the heap.
031:047 Laban called it Jegar Sahadutha,{"Jegar Sahadutha"
        means "Witness Heap" in Aramaic.} but Jacob called
        it Galeed.{"Galeed" means "Witness Heap" in Hebrew.}
031:048 Laban said, "This heap is witness between me and you this day."
        Therefore it was named Galeed
031:049 and Mizpah, for he said, "Yahweh watch between me and you,
        when we are absent one from another.
031:050 If you afflict my daughters, or if you take wives besides
        my daughters, no man is with us; behold, God is witness
        between me and you."
031:051 Laban said to Jacob, "See this heap, and see the pillar,
        which I have set between me and you.
031:052 May this heap be a witness, and the pillar be a witness,
        that I will not pass over this heap to you, and that you
        will not pass over this heap and this pillar to me, for harm.
031:053 The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their father,
        judge between us."  Then Jacob swore by the fear of
        his father, Isaac.
031:054 Jacob offered a sacrifice in the mountain, and called his
        relatives to eat bread.  They ate bread, and stayed all night
        in the mountain.
031:055 Early in the morning, Laban rose up, and kissed his sons and
        his daughters, and blessed them.  Laban departed and returned
        to his place.
032:001 Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God met him.
032:002 When he saw them, Jacob said, "This is God's army."
        He called the name of that place Mahanaim.
032:003 Jacob sent messengers in front of him to Esau, his brother,
        to the land of Seir, the field of Edom.
032:004 He commanded them, saying, "This is what you shall tell
        my lord, Esau:  'This is what your servant, Jacob, says.
        I have lived as a foreigner with Laban, and stayed until now.
032:005 I have oxen, donkeys, flocks, male servants, and female servants.
        I have sent to tell my lord, that I may find favor in your sight.'"
032:006 The messengers returned to Jacob, saying, "We came to your
        brother Esau.  Not only that, but he comes to meet you,
        and four hundred men with him."
032:007 Then Jacob was greatly afraid and was distressed.
        He divided the people who were with him, and the flocks,
        and the herds, and the camels, into two companies;
032:008 and he said, "If Esau comes to the one company, and strikes it,
        then the company which is left will escape."
032:009 Jacob said, "God of my father Abraham, and God of my
        father Isaac, Yahweh, who said to me, 'Return to your country,
        and to your relatives, and I will do you good,'
032:010 I am not worthy of the least of all the loving kindnesses,
        and of all the truth, which you have shown to your servant;
        for with just my staff I passed over this Jordan; and now I
        have become two companies.
032:011 Please deliver me from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau:
        for I fear him, lest he come and strike me, and the mothers
        with the children.
032:012 You said, 'I will surely do you good, and make your seed
        as the sand of the sea, which can't be numbered because there
        are so many.'"
032:013 He lodged there that night, and took from that which he had
        with him, a present for Esau, his brother:
032:014 two hundred female goats and twenty male goats, two hundred
        ewes and twenty rams,
032:015 thirty milk camels and their colts, forty cows, ten bulls,
        twenty female donkeys and ten foals.
032:016 He delivered them into the hands of his servants, every herd
        by itself, and said to his servants, "Pass over before me,
        and put a space between herd and herd."
032:017 He commanded the foremost, saying, "When Esau, my brother, meets you,
        and asks you, saying, 'Whose are you?  Where are you going?
        Whose are these before you?'
032:018 Then you shall say, 'They are your servant, Jacob's. It is a
        present sent to my lord, Esau.  Behold, he also is behind us.'"
032:019 He commanded also the second, and the third, and all that followed
        the herds, saying, "This is how you shall speak to Esau,
        when you find him.
032:020 You shall say, 'Not only that, but behold, your servant, Jacob,
        is behind us.'"  For, he said, "I will appease him with the present
        that goes before me, and afterward I will see his face.
        Perhaps he will accept me."
032:021 So the present passed over before him, and he himself lodged
        that night in the camp.
032:022 He rose up that night, and took his two wives, and his two handmaids,
        and his eleven sons, and passed over the ford of the Jabbok.
032:023 He took them, and sent them over the stream, and sent over
        that which he had.
032:024 Jacob was left alone, and wrestled with a man there until
        the breaking of the day.
032:025 When he saw that he didn't prevail against him, he touched
        the hollow of his thigh, and the hollow of Jacob's thigh
        was strained, as he wrestled.
032:026 The man said, "Let me go, for the day breaks."  Jacob said,
        "I won't let you go, unless you bless me."
032:027 He said to him, "What is your name?"  He said, "Jacob."
032:028 He said, "Your name will no longer be called Jacob, but Israel;
        for you have fought with God and with men, and have prevailed."
032:029 Jacob asked him, "Please tell me your name."
        He said, "Why is it that you ask what my name is?"
        He blessed him there.
032:030 Jacob called the name of the place Peniel{Peniel means "face
        of God."}: for, he said, "I have seen God face to face,
        and my life is preserved."
032:031 The sun rose on him as he passed over Peniel, and he limped
        because of his thigh.
032:032 Therefore the children of Israel don't eat the sinew of
        the hip, which is on the hollow of the thigh, to this day,
        because he touched the hollow of Jacob's thigh in the sinew
        of the hip.
033:001 Jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, Esau was coming,
        and with him four hundred men.  He divided the children
        between Leah, Rachel, and the two handmaids.
033:002 He put the handmaids and their children in front, Leah and her
        children after, and Rachel and Joseph at the rear.
033:003 He himself passed over in front of them, and bowed himself
        to the ground seven times, until he came near to his brother.
033:004 Esau ran to meet him, embraced him, fell on his neck, kissed him,
        and they wept.
033:005 He lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children;
        and said, "Who are these with you?"  He said, "The children
        whom God has graciously given your servant."
033:006 Then the handmaids came near with their children,
        and they bowed themselves.
033:007 Leah also and her children came near, and bowed themselves.
        After them, Joseph came near with Rachel, and they bowed themselves.
033:008 Esau said, "What do you mean by all this company which I met?"
        Jacob said, "To find favor in the sight of my lord."
033:009 Esau said, "I have enough, my brother; let that which you
        have be yours."
033:010 Jacob said, "Please, no, if I have now found favor in your sight,
        then receive my present at my hand, because I have seen your face,
        as one sees the face of God, and you were pleased with me.
033:011 Please take the gift that I brought to you, because God has
        dealt graciously with me, and because I have enough."
        He urged him, and he took it.
033:012 Esau said, "Let us take our journey, and let us go, and I
        will go before you."
033:013 Jacob said to him, "My lord knows that the children are tender,
        and that the flocks and herds with me have their young,
        and if they overdrive them one day, all the flocks will die.
033:014 Please let my lord pass over before his servant, and I
        will lead on gently, according to the pace of the livestock
        that are before me and according to the pace of the children,
        until I come to my lord to Seir."
033:015 Esau said, "Let me now leave with you some of the folk who are
        with me."  He said, "Why?  Let me find favor in the sight
        of my lord."
033:016 So Esau returned that day on his way to Seir.
033:017 Jacob traveled to Succoth, built himself a house, and made
        shelters for his livestock.  Therefore the name of the place
        is called Succoth.{succoth means shelters or booths.}
033:018 Jacob came in peace to the city of Shechem, which is
        in the land of Canaan, when he came from Paddan Aram;
        and encamped before the city.
033:019 He bought the parcel of ground where he had spread his tent,
        at the hand of the children of Hamor, Shechem's father,
        for one hundred pieces of money.
033:020 He erected an altar there, and called it El Elohe Israel.{El
        Elohe Israel means "God, the God of Israel" or "The God
        of Israel is mighty."}
034:001 Dinah, the daughter of Leah, whom she bore to Jacob, went out
        to see the daughters of the land.
034:002 Shechem the son of Hamor the Hivite, the prince of the land, saw her.
        He took her, lay with her, and humbled her.
034:003 His soul joined to Dinah, the daughter of Jacob, and he loved
        the young lady, and spoke kindly to the young lady.
034:004 Shechem spoke to his father, Hamor, saying, "Get me this young
        lady as a wife."
034:005 Now Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah, his daughter;
        and his sons were with his livestock in the field.
        Jacob held his peace until they came.
034:006 Hamor the father of Shechem went out to Jacob to talk with him.
034:007 The sons of Jacob came in from the field when they heard it.
        The men were grieved, and they were very angry, because he
        had done folly in Israel in lying with Jacob's daughter;
        a which thing ought not to be done.
034:008 Hamor talked with them, saying, "The soul of my son, Shechem,
        longs for your daughter.  Please give her to him as a wife.
034:009 Make marriages with us.  Give your daughters to us, and take
        our daughters for yourselves.
034:010 You shall dwell with us, and the land will be before you.
        Live and trade in it, and get possessions in it."
034:011 Shechem said to her father and to her brothers, "Let me find
        favor in your eyes, and whatever you will tell me I will give.
034:012 Ask me a great amount for a dowry, and I will give whatever
        you ask of me, but give me the young lady as a wife."
034:013 The sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor his father with deceit,
        and spoke, because he had defiled Dinah their sister,
034:014 and said to them, "We can't do this thing, to give our sister
        to one who is uncircumcised; for that is a reproach to us.
034:015 Only on this condition will we consent to you.  If you will
        be as we are, that every male of you be circumcised;
034:016 then will we give our daughters to you, and we will take
        your daughters to us, and we will dwell with you, and we
        will become one people.
034:017 But if you will not listen to us, to be circumcised, then we
        will take our sister,{Hebrew has, literally, "daughter"} and we
        will be gone."
034:018 Their words pleased Hamor and Shechem, Hamor's son.
034:019 The young man didn't wait to do this thing, because he had delight
        in Jacob's daughter, and he was honored above all the house
        of his father.
034:020 Hamor and Shechem, his son, came to the gate of their city,
        and talked with the men of their city, saying,
034:021 "These men are peaceful with us.  Therefore let them live in the land
        and trade in it.  For behold, the land is large enough for them.
        Let us take their daughters to us for wives, and let us give
        them our daughters.
034:022 Only on this condition will the men consent to us to live with us,
        to become one people, if every male among us is circumcised,
        as they are circumcised.
034:023 Won't their livestock and their possessions and all their
        animals be ours?  Only let us give our consent to them,
        and they will dwell with us."
034:024 All who went out of the gate of his city listened to Hamor,
        and to Shechem his son; and every male was circumcised,
        all who went out of the gate of his city.
034:025 It happened on the third day, when they were sore,
        that two of Jacob's sons, Simeon and Levi, Dinah's brothers,
        each took his sword, came upon the unsuspecting city,
        and killed all the males.
034:026 They killed Hamor and Shechem, his son, with the edge of the sword,
        and took Dinah out of Shechem's house, and went away.
034:027 Jacob's sons came on the dead, and plundered the city,
        because they had defiled their sister.
034:028 They took their flocks, their herds, their donkeys, that which
        was in the city, that which was in the field,
034:029 and all their wealth.  They took captive all their little ones
        and their wives, and took as plunder everything that was
        in the house.
034:030 Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, "You have troubled me,
        to make me odious to the inhabitants of the land,
        among the Canaanites and the Perizzites.  I am few in number.
        They will gather themselves together against me and strike me,
        and I will be destroyed, I and my house."
034:031 They said, "Should he deal with our sister as with a prostitute?"
035:001 God said to Jacob, "Arise, go up to Bethel, and live there.
        Make there an altar to God, who appeared to you when you fled
        from the face of Esau your brother."
035:002 Then Jacob said to his household, and to all who were with him,
        "Put away the foreign gods that are among you, purify yourselves,
        change your garments.
035:003 Let us arise, and go up to Bethel.  I will make there
        an altar to God, who answered me in the day of my distress,
        and was with me in the way which I went."
035:004 They gave to Jacob all the foreign gods which were in their hands,
        and the rings which were in their ears; and Jacob hid them
        under the oak which was by Shechem.
035:005 They traveled, and a terror of God was on the cities that were
        around them, and they didn't pursue the sons of Jacob.
035:006 So Jacob came to Luz (that is, Bethel), which is in the land
        of Canaan, he and all the people who were with him.
035:007 He built an altar there, and called the place El Beth El;
        because there God was revealed to him, when he fled from
        the face of his brother.
035:008 Deborah, Rebekah's nurse, died, and she was buried below Bethel
        under the oak; and the name of it was called Allon Bacuth.
035:009 God appeared to Jacob again, when he came from Paddan Aram,
        and blessed him.
035:010 God said to him, "Your name is Jacob.  Your name shall
        not be Jacob any more, but your name will be Israel."
        He named him Israel.
035:011 God said to him, "I am God Almighty.  Be fruitful and multiply.
        A nation and a company of nations will be from you, and kings
        will come out of your body.
035:012 The land which I gave to Abraham and Isaac, I will give it to you,
        and to your seed after you will I give the land."
035:013 God went up from him in the place where he spoke with him.
035:014 Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he spoke with him,
        a pillar of stone.  He poured out a drink offering on it,
        and poured oil on it.
035:015 Jacob called the name of the place where God spoke with him "Bethel."
035:016 They traveled from Bethel.  There was still some distance
        to come to Ephrath, and Rachel travailed.  She had hard labor.
035:017 When she was in hard labor, the midwife said to her,
        "Don't be afraid, for now you will have another son."
035:018 It happened, as her soul was departing (for she died),
        that she named him Benoni,{"Benoni" means "son of my
        trouble."} but his father named him Benjamin.{"Benjamin"
        means "son of my right hand."}
035:019 Rachel died, and was buried in the way to Ephrath
        (the same is Bethlehem).
035:020 Jacob set up a pillar on her grave.  The same is the Pillar
        of Rachel's grave to this day.
035:021 Israel traveled, and spread his tent beyond the tower of Eder.
035:022 It happened, while Israel lived in that land, that Reuben went and
        lay with Bilhah, his father's concubine, and Israel heard of it.
        Now the sons of Jacob were twelve.
035:023 The sons of Leah:  Reuben (Jacob's firstborn),
        Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun.
035:024 The sons of Rachel:  Joseph and Benjamin.
035:025 The sons of Bilhah (Rachel's handmaid):  Dan and Naphtali.
035:026 The sons of Zilpah (Leah's handmaid):  Gad and Asher.
        These are the sons of Jacob, who were born to him in Paddan Aram.
035:027 Jacob came to Isaac his father, to Mamre, to Kiriath Arba
        (which is Hebron), where Abraham and Isaac lived as foreigners.
035:028 The days of Isaac were one hundred eighty years.
035:029 Isaac gave up the spirit, and died, and was gathered to his people,
        old and full of days.  Esau and Jacob, his sons, buried him.
036:001 Now this is the history of the generations of Esau
        (that is, Edom).
036:002 Esau took his wives from the daughters of Canaan:  Adah the daughter
        of Elon, the Hittite; and Oholibamah the daughter of Anah,
        the daughter of Zibeon, the Hivite;
036:003 and Basemath, Ishmael's daughter, sister of Nebaioth.
036:004 Adah bore to Esau Eliphaz.  Basemath bore Reuel.
036:005 Oholibamah bore Jeush, Jalam, and Korah.  These are the sons
        of Esau, who were born to him in the land of Canaan.
036:006 Esau took his wives, his sons, his daughters, and all the members
        of his household, with his livestock, all his animals, and all
        his possessions, which he had gathered in the land of Canaan,
        and went into a land away from his brother Jacob.
036:007 For their substance was too great for them to dwell together,
        and the land of their travels couldn't bear them because
        of their livestock.
036:008 Esau lived in the hill country of Seir.  Esau is Edom.
036:009 This is the history of the generations of Esau the father
        of the Edomites in the hill country of Seir:
036:010 these are the names of Esau's sons:  Eliphaz, the son
        of Adah, the wife of Esau; and Reuel, the son of Basemath,
        the wife of Esau.
036:011 The sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz.
036:012 Timna was concubine to Eliphaz, Esau's son; and she bore
        to Eliphaz Amalek.  These are the sons of Adah, Esau's wife.
036:013 These are the sons of Reuel:  Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah.
        These were the sons of Basemath, Esau's wife.
036:014 These were the sons of Oholibamah, the daughter of Anah,
        the daughter of Zibeon, Esau's wife:  she bore to
        Esau Jeush, Jalam, and Korah.
036:015 These are the chiefs of the sons of Esau:  the sons of
        Eliphaz the firstborn of Esau:  chief Teman, chief Omar,
        chief Zepho, chief Kenaz,
036:016 chief Korah, chief Gatam, chief Amalek:  these are the chiefs
        who came of Eliphaz in the land of Edom; these are the
        sons of Adah.
036:017 These are the sons of Reuel, Esau's son:
        chief Nahath, chief Zerah, chief Shammah, chief Mizzah:
        these are the chiefs who came of Reuel in the land of Edom;
        these are the sons of Basemath, Esau's wife.
036:018 These are the sons of Oholibamah, Esau's wife:  chief Jeush,
        chief Jalam, chief Korah:  these are the chiefs who came
        of Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, Esau's wife.
036:019 These are the sons of Esau (that is, Edom), and these
        are their chiefs.
036:020 These are the sons of Seir the Horite, the inhabitants of the land:
        Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah,
036:021 Dishon, Ezer, and Dishan.  These are the chiefs who came
        of the Horites, the children of Seir in the land of Edom.
036:022 The children of Lotan were Hori and Heman.  Lotan's sister was Timna.
036:023 These are the children of Shobal:  Alvan, Manahath, Ebal, Shepho,
        and Onam.
036:024 These are the children of Zibeon:  Aiah and Anah.
        This is Anah who found the hot springs in the wilderness,
        as he fed the donkeys of Zibeon his father.
036:025 These are the children of Anah:  Dishon and Oholibamah,
        the daughter of Anah.
036:026 These are the children of Dishon:  Hemdan, Eshban, Ithran,
        and Cheran.
036:027 These are the children of Ezer:  Bilhan, Zaavan, and Akan.
036:028 These are the children of Dishan:  Uz and Aran.
036:029 These are the chiefs who came of the Horites:  chief Lotan,
        chief Shobal, chief Zibeon, chief Anah,
036:030 chief Dishon, chief Ezer, and chief Dishan:  these are
        the chiefs who came of the Horites, according to their chiefs
        in the land of Seir.
036:031 These are the kings who reigned in the land of Edom,
        before any king reigned over the children of Israel.
036:032 Bela, the son of Beor, reigned in Edom.  The name of his
        city was Dinhabah.
036:033 Bela died, and Jobab, the son of Zerah of Bozrah,
        reigned in his place.
036:034 Jobab died, and Husham of the land of the Temanites reigned
        in his place.
036:035 Husham died, and Hadad, the son of Bedad, who struck
        Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his place.
        The name of his city was Avith.
036:036 Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his place.
036:037 Samlah died, and Shaul of Rehoboth by the river,
        reigned in his place.
036:038 Shaul died, and Baal Hanan, the son of Achbor reigned
        in his place.
036:039 Baal Hanan the son of Achbor died, and Hadar reigned in his place.
        The name of his city was Pau.  His wife's name was Mehetabel,
        the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab.
036:040 These are the names of the chiefs who came from Esau, according to
        their families, after their places, and by their names:
        chief Timna, chief Alvah, chief Jetheth,
036:041 chief Oholibamah, chief Elah, chief Pinon,
036:042 chief Kenaz, chief Teman, chief Mibzar,
036:043 chief Magdiel, and chief Iram.  These are the chiefs of Edom,
        according to their habitations in the land of their possession.
        This is Esau, the father of the Edomites.
037:001 Jacob lived in the land of his father's travels, in the
        land of Canaan.
037:002 This is the history of the generations of Jacob.  Joseph, being
        seventeen years old, was feeding the flock with his brothers.
        He was a boy with the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah, his father's wives.
        Joseph brought an evil report of them to their father.
037:003 Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his children,
        because he was the son of his old age, and he made him a coat
        of many colors.
037:004 His brothers saw that their father loved him more than
        all his brothers, and they hated him, and couldn't speak
        peaceably to him.
037:005 Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it to his brothers,
        and they hated him all the more.
037:006 He said to them, "Please hear this dream which I have dreamed:
037:007 for behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and behold,
        my sheaf arose and also stood upright; and behold, your sheaves
        came around, and bowed down to my sheaf."
037:008 His brothers said to him, "Will you indeed reign over us?
        Or will you indeed have dominion over us?"  They hated him
        all the more for his dreams and for his words.
037:009 He dreamed yet another dream, and told it to his brothers,
        and said, "Behold, I have dreamed yet another dream:
        and behold, the sun and the moon and eleven stars bowed
        down to me."
037:010 He told it to his father and to his brothers.  His father rebuked him,
        and said to him, "What is this dream that you have dreamed?
        Will I and your mother and your brothers indeed come to bow
        ourselves down to you to the earth?"
037:011 His brothers envied him, but his father kept this saying in mind.
037:012 His brothers went to feed their father's flock in Shechem.
037:013 Israel said to Joseph, "Aren't your brothers feeding
        the flock in Shechem?  Come, and I will send you to them."
        He said to him, "Here I am."
037:014 He said to him, "Go now, see whether it is well with your brothers,
        and well with the flock; and bring me word again."
        So he sent him out of the valley of Hebron, and he came to Shechem.
037:015 A certain man found him, and behold, he was wandering in the field.
        The man asked him, "What are you looking for?"
037:016 He said, "I am looking for my brothers.  Tell me, please,
        where they are feeding the flock."
037:017 The man said, "They have left here, for I heard them say,
        'Let us go to Dothan.'"  Joseph went after his brothers,
        and found them in Dothan.
037:018 They saw him afar off, and before he came near to them,
        they conspired against him to kill him.
037:019 They said one to another, "Behold, this dreamer comes.
037:020 Come now therefore, and let's kill him, and cast him into one
        of the pits, and we will say, 'An evil animal has devoured him.'
        We will see what will become of his dreams."
037:021 Reuben heard it, and delivered him out of their hand, and said,
        "Let's not take his life."
037:022 Reuben said to them, "Shed no blood.  Throw him into this
        pit that is in the wilderness, but lay no hand on him"--
        that he might deliver him out of their hand, to restore him
        to his father.
037:023 It happened, when Joseph came to his brothers, that they stripped
        Joseph of his coat, the coat of many colors that was on him;
037:024 and they took him, and threw him into the pit.  The pit was empty.
        There was no water in it.
037:025 They sat down to eat bread, and they lifted up their eyes and looked,
        and saw a caravan of Ishmaelites was coming from Gilead,
        with their camels bearing spices and balm and myrrh,
        going to carry it down to Egypt.
037:026 Judah said to his brothers, "What profit is it if we kill
        our brother and conceal his blood?
037:027 Come, and let's sell him to the Ishmaelites, and not let
        our hand be on him; for he is our brother, our flesh."
        His brothers listened to him.
037:028 Midianites who were merchants passed by, and they drew and lifted
        up Joseph out of the pit, and sold Joseph to the Ishmaelites
        for twenty pieces of silver.  They brought Joseph into Egypt.
037:029 Reuben returned to the pit; and saw that Joseph wasn't in the pit;
        and he tore his clothes.
037:030 He returned to his brothers, and said, "The child is no more;
        and I, where will I go?"
037:031 They took Joseph's coat, and killed a male goat, and dipped
        the coat in the blood.
037:032 They took the coat of many colors, and they brought
        it to their father, and said, "We have found this.
        Examine it, now, whether it is your son's coat or not."
037:033 He recognized it, and said, "It is my son's coat.
        An evil animal has devoured him.  Joseph is without doubt
        torn in pieces."
037:034 Jacob tore his clothes, and put sackcloth on his waist,
        and mourned for his son many days.
037:035 All his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him,
        but he refused to be comforted.  He said, "For I will go down
        to Sheol{Sheol is the place of the dead.} to my son mourning."
        His father wept for him.
037:036 The Midianites sold him into Egypt to Potiphar, an officer
        of Pharaoh's, the captain of the guard.
038:001 It happened at that time, that Judah went down from his brothers,
        and visited a certain Adullamite, whose name was Hirah.
038:002 Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Canaanite whose name
        was Shua.  He took her, and went in to her.
038:003 She conceived, and bore a son; and he named him Er.
038:004 She conceived again, and bore a son; and she named him Onan.
038:005 She yet again bore a son, and named him Shelah:
        and he was at Chezib, when she bore him.
038:006 Judah took a wife for Er, his firstborn, and her name was Tamar.
038:007 Er, Judah's firstborn, was wicked in the sight of Yahweh.
        Yahweh killed him.
038:008 Judah said to Onan, "Go in to your brother's wife, and perform
        the duty of a husband's brother to her, and raise up seed
        to your brother."
038:009 Onan knew that the seed wouldn't be his; and it happened,
        when he went in to his brother's wife, that he spilled it
        on the ground, lest he should give seed to his brother.
038:010 The thing which he did was evil in the sight of Yahweh,
        and he killed him also.
038:011 Then Judah said to Tamar, his daughter-in-law, "Remain a widow
        in your father's house, until Shelah, my son, is grown up;"
        for he said, "Lest he also die, like his brothers."
        Tamar went and lived in her father's house.
038:012 After many days, Shua's daughter, the wife of Judah, died.
        Judah was comforted, and went up to his sheepshearers to Timnah,
        he and his friend Hirah, the Adullamite.
038:013 It was told Tamar, saying, "Behold, your father-in-law is going
        up to Timnah to shear his sheep."
038:014 She took off of her the garments of her widowhood,
        and covered herself with her veil, and wrapped herself,
        and sat in the gate of Enaim, which is by the way to Timnah;
        for she saw that Shelah was grown up, and she wasn't given
        to him as a wife.
038:015 When Judah saw her, he thought that she was a prostitute,
        for she had covered her face.
038:016 He turned to her by the way, and said, "Please come,
        let me come in to you," for he didn't know that she was
        his daughter-in-law. She said, "What will you give me,
        that you may come in to me?"
038:017 He said, "I will send you a kid of the goats from the flock."
        She said, "Will you give me a pledge, until you send it?"
038:018 He said, "What pledge will I give you?"  She said, "Your signet
        and your cord, and your staff that is in your hand."
        He gave them to her, and came in to her, and she conceived by him.
038:019 She arose, and went away, and put off her veil from her,
        and put on the garments of her widowhood.
038:020 Judah sent the kid of the goats by the hand of his friend,
        the Adullamite, to receive the pledge from the woman's hand,
        but he didn't find her.
038:021 Then he asked the men of her place, saying, "Where is
        the prostitute, that was at Enaim by the road?"  They said,
        "There has been no prostitute here."
038:022 He returned to Judah, and said, "I haven't found her;
        and also the men of the place said, 'There has been
        no prostitute here.'"
038:023 Judah said, "Let her keep it, lest we be shamed.  Behold, I sent
        this kid, and you haven't found her."
038:024 It happened about three months later, that it was told Judah,
        saying, "Tamar, your daughter-in-law, has played the prostitute;
        and moreover, behold, she is with child by prostitution."
        Judah said, "Bring her forth, and let her be burnt."
038:025 When she was brought forth, she sent to her father-in-law,
        saying, "By the man, whose these are, I am with child."
        She also said, "Please discern whose are these--the signet,
        and the cords, and the staff."
038:026 Judah acknowledged them, and said, "She is more righteous
        than I, because I didn't give her to Shelah, my son."
        He knew her again no more.
038:027 It happened in the time of her travail, that behold,
        twins were in her womb.
038:028 When she travailed, one put out a hand, and the midwife took and tied
        a scarlet thread on his hand, saying, "This came out first."
038:029 It happened, as he drew back his hand, that behold, his brother
        came out, and she said, "Why have you made a breach for yourself?"
        Therefore his name was called Perez.{Perez means "breaking out."}
038:030 Afterward his brother came out, that had the scarlet
        thread on his hand, and his name was called Zerah.{Zerah
        means "scarlet" or "brightness."}
039:001 Joseph was brought down to Egypt.  Potiphar, an officer
        of Pharaoh's, the captain of the guard, an Egyptian,
        bought him from the hand of the Ishmaelites that had brought
        him down there.
039:002 Yahweh was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man.
        He was in the house of his master the Egyptian.
039:003 His master saw that Yahweh was with him, and that Yahweh made
        all that he did prosper in his hand.
039:004 Joseph found favor in his sight.  He ministered to him,
        and he made him overseer over his house, and all that he had
        he put into his hand.
039:005 It happened from the time that he made him overseer in his house,
        and over all that he had, that Yahweh blessed the Egyptian's
        house for Joseph's sake; and the blessing of Yahweh was on
        all that he had, in the house and in the field.
039:006 He left all that he had in Joseph's hand.  He didn't concern
        himself with anything, except for the food which he ate.
        Joseph was well-built and handsome.
039:007 It happened after these things, that his master's wife cast
        her eyes on Joseph; and she said, "Lie with me."
039:008 But he refused, and said to his master's wife, "Behold, my master
        doesn't know what is with me in the house, and he has put
        all that he has into my hand.
039:009 He isn't greater in this house than I, neither has he kept
        back anything from me but you, because you are his wife.
        How then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?"
039:010 As she spoke to Joseph day by day, he didn't listen to her,
        to lie by her, or to be with her.
039:011 About this time, he went into the house to do his work,
        and there were none of the men of the house inside.
039:012 She caught him by his garment, saying, "Lie with me!"
        He left his garment in her hand, and ran outside.
039:013 When she saw that he had left his garment in her hand,
        and had run outside,
039:014 she called to the men of her house, and spoke to them,
        saying, "Behold, he has brought in a Hebrew to us to mock us.
        He came in to me to lie with me, and I cried with a loud voice.
039:015 It happened, when he heard that I lifted up my voice and cried,
        that he left his garment by me, and ran outside."
039:016 She laid up his garment by her, until his master came home.
039:017 She spoke to him according to these words, saying, "The Hebrew
        servant, whom you have brought to us, came in to me to mock me,
039:018 and it happened, as I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left
        his garment by me, and ran outside."
039:019 It happened, when his master heard the words of his wife,
        which she spoke to him, saying, "This is what your servant
        did to me," that his wrath was kindled.
039:020 Joseph's master took him, and put him into the prison,
        the place where the king's prisoners were bound, and he was
        there in custody.
039:021 But Yahweh was with Joseph, and showed kindness to him,
        and gave him favor in the sight of the keeper of the prison.
039:022 The keeper of the prison committed to Joseph's hand all
        the prisoners who were in the prison.  Whatever they did there,
        he was responsible for it.
039:023 The keeper of the prison didn't look after anything that was under
        his hand, because Yahweh was with him; and that which he did,
        Yahweh made it prosper.
040:001 It happened after these things, that the butler of the king
        of Egypt and his baker offended their lord, the king of Egypt.
040:002 Pharaoh was angry with his two officers, the chief cupbearer
        and the chief baker.
040:003 He put them in custody in the house of the captain of the guard,
        into the prison, the place where Joseph was bound.
040:004 The captain of the guard assigned them to Joseph, and he took
        care of them.  They stayed in prison many days.
040:005 They both dreamed a dream, each man his dream, in one night,
        each man according to the interpretation of his dream,
        the cupbearer and the baker of the king of Egypt, who were
        bound in the prison.
040:006 Joseph came in to them in the morning, and saw them, and saw
        that they were sad.
040:007 He asked Pharaoh's officers who were with him in custody in his
        master's house, saying, "Why do you look so sad today?"
040:008 They said to him, "We have dreamed a dream, and there
        is no one who can interpret it."  Joseph said to them,
        "Don't interpretations belong to God?  Please tell it to me."
040:009 The chief cupbearer told his dream to Joseph, and said to him,
        "In my dream, behold, a vine was in front of me,
040:010 and in the vine were three branches.  It was as though it budded,
        its blossoms shot forth, and the clusters of it brought
        forth ripe grapes.
040:011 Pharaoh's cup was in my hand; and I took the grapes,
        and pressed them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup
        into Pharaoh's hand."
040:012 Joseph said to him, "This is the interpretation of it:
        the three branches are three days.
040:013 Within three more days, Pharaoh will lift up your head,
        and restore you to your office.  You will give Pharaoh's cup
        into his hand, the way you did when you were his cupbearer.
040:014 But remember me when it will be well with you, and show
        kindness, please, to me, and make mention of me to Pharaoh,
        and bring me out of this house.
040:015 For indeed, I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews,
        and here also have I done nothing that they should put me
        into the dungeon."
040:016 When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good,
        he said to Joseph, "I also was in my dream, and behold,
        three baskets of white bread were on my head.
040:017 In the uppermost basket there was all kinds of baked food
        for Pharaoh, and the birds ate them out of the basket
        on my head."
040:018 Joseph answered, "This is the interpretation of it.
        The three baskets are three days.
040:019 Within three more days, Pharaoh will lift up your head from
        off you, and will hang you on a tree; and the birds will eat
        your flesh from off you."
040:020 It happened the third day, which was Pharaoh's birthday,
        that he made a feast for all his servants, and he lifted up
        the head of the chief cupbearer and the head of the chief
        baker among his servants.
040:021 He restored the chief cupbearer to his position again,
        and he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand;
040:022 but he hanged the chief baker, as Joseph had interpreted to them.
040:023 Yet the chief cupbearer didn't remember Joseph, but forgot him.
041:001 It happened at the end of two full years, that Pharaoh dreamed:
        and behold, he stood by the river.
041:002 Behold, there came up out of the river seven cattle, sleek and fat,
        and they fed in the marsh grass.
041:003 Behold, seven other cattle came up after them out of the river,
        ugly and thin, and stood by the other cattle on the brink
        of the river.
041:004 The ugly and thin cattle ate up the seven sleek and fat cattle.
        So Pharaoh awoke.
041:005 He slept and dreamed a second time:  and behold, seven heads
        of grain came up on one stalk, healthy and good.
041:006 Behold, seven heads of grain, thin and blasted with the east wind,
        sprung up after them.
041:007 The thin heads of grain swallowed up the seven healthy and full ears.
        Pharaoh awoke, and behold, it was a dream.
041:008 It happened in the morning that his spirit was troubled,
        and he sent and called for all of Egypt's magicians and wise men.
        Pharaoh told them his dreams, but there was no one who could
        interpret them to Pharaoh.
041:009 Then the chief cupbearer spoke to Pharaoh, saying, "I remember
        my faults today.
041:010 Pharaoh was angry with his servants, and put me in custody in
        the house of the captain of the guard, me and the chief baker.
041:011 We dreamed a dream in one night, I and he.  We dreamed each man
        according to the interpretation of his dream.
041:012 There was with us there a young man, a Hebrew, servant to the captain
        of the guard, and we told him, and he interpreted to us our dreams.
        To each man according to his dream he interpreted.
041:013 It happened, as he interpreted to us, so it was:
        he restored me to my office, and he hanged him."
041:014 Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph, and they brought him hastily
        out of the dungeon.  He shaved himself, changed his clothing,
        and came in to Pharaoh.
041:015 Pharaoh said to Joseph, "I have dreamed a dream, and there
        is no one who can interpret it.  I have heard it said of you,
        that when you hear a dream you can interpret it."
041:016 Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, "It isn't in me.
        God will give Pharaoh an answer of peace."
041:017 Pharaoh spoke to Joseph, "In my dream, behold, I stood on
        the brink of the river:
041:018 and behold, there came up out of the river seven cattle,
        fat and sleek.  They fed in the marsh grass,
041:019 and behold, seven other cattle came up after them, poor and
        very ugly and thin, such as I never saw in all the land
        of Egypt for ugliness.
041:020 The thin and ugly cattle ate up the first seven fat cattle,
041:021 and when they had eaten them up, it couldn't be known that they
        had eaten them, but they were still ugly, as at the beginning.
        So I awoke.
041:022 I saw in my dream, and behold, seven heads of grain came up
        on one stalk, full and good:
041:023 and behold, seven heads of grain, withered, thin, and blasted
        with the east wind, sprung up after them.
041:024 The thin heads of grain swallowed up the seven good heads of grain.
        I told it to the magicians, but there was no one who could
        explain it to me."
041:025 Joseph said to Pharaoh, "The dream of Pharaoh is one.
        What God is about to do he has declared to Pharaoh.
041:026 The seven good cattle are seven years; and the seven good heads
        of grain are seven years.  The dream is one.
041:027 The seven thin and ugly cattle that came up after them are
        seven years, and also the seven empty heads of grain blasted
        with the east wind; they will be seven years of famine.
041:028 That is the thing which I spoke to Pharaoh.  What God is about
        to do he has shown to Pharaoh.
041:029 Behold, there come seven years of great plenty throughout
        all the land of Egypt.
041:030 There will arise after them seven years of famine,
        and all the plenty will be forgotten in the land of Egypt.
        The famine will consume the land,
041:031 and the plenty will not be known in the land by reason of that
        famine which follows; for it will be very grievous.
041:032 The dream was doubled to Pharaoh, because the thing is established
        by God, and God will shortly bring it to pass.
041:033 "Now therefore let Pharaoh look for a discreet and wise man,
        and set him over the land of Egypt.
041:034 Let Pharaoh do this, and let him appoint overseers over the land,
        and take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt's produce
        in the seven plenteous years.
041:035 Let them gather all the food of these good years that come,
        and lay up grain under the hand of Pharaoh for food in the cities,
        and let them keep it.
041:036 The food will be for a store to the land against the seven
        years of famine, which will be in the land of Egypt;
        that the land not perish through the famine."
041:037 The thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes
        of all his servants.
041:038 Pharaoh said to his servants, "Can we find such a one as this,
        a man in whom is the Spirit of God?"
041:039 Pharaoh said to Joseph, "Because God has shown you all of this,
        there is none so discreet and wise as you.
041:040 You shall be over my house, and according to your word
        will all my people be ruled.  Only in the throne I will be
        greater than you."
041:041 Pharaoh said to Joseph, "Behold, I have set you over all
        the land of Egypt."
041:042 Pharaoh took off his signet ring from his hand, and put it
        on Joseph's hand, and arrayed him in robes of fine linen,
        and put a gold chain about his neck,
041:043 and he made him to ride in the second chariot which he had.
        They cried before him, "Bow the knee!"  He set him over all
        the land of Egypt.
041:044 Pharaoh said to Joseph, "I am Pharaoh, and without you shall
        no man lift up his hand or his foot in all the land of Egypt."
041:045 Pharaoh called Joseph's name Zaphenath-Paneah; and he gave
        him Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera priest of On as a wife.
        Joseph went out over the land of Egypt.
041:046 Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh king
        of Egypt.  Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh,
        and went throughout all the land of Egypt.
041:047 In the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth abundantly.
041:048 He gathered up all the food of the seven years which were
        in the land of Egypt, and laid up the food in the cities:
        the food of the field, which was round about every city,
        he laid up in the same.
041:049 Joseph laid up grain as the sand of the sea, very much,
        until he stopped counting, for it was without number.
041:050 To Joseph were born two sons before the year of famine came,
        whom Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera priest of On,
        bore to him.
041:051 Joseph called the name of the firstborn Manasseh,{"Manasseh"
        sounds like the Hebrew for "forget."} "For," he said, "God has
        made me forget all my toil, and all my father's house."
041:052 The name of the second, he called Ephraim{"Ephraim"
        sounds like the Hebrew for "twice fruitful."}: "For God has
        made me fruitful in the land of my affliction."
041:053 The seven years of plenty, that were in the land of Egypt,
        came to an end.
041:054 The seven years of famine began to come, just as Joseph had said.
        There was famine in all lands, but in all the land of Egypt
        there was bread.
041:055 When all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh
        for bread, and Pharaoh said to all the Egyptians, "Go to Joseph.
        What he says to you, do."
041:056 The famine was over all the surface of the earth.
        Joseph opened all the store houses, and sold to the Egyptians.
        The famine was severe in the land of Egypt.
041:057 All countries came into Egypt, to Joseph, to buy grain,
        because the famine was severe in all the earth.
042:001 Now Jacob saw that there was grain in Egypt, and Jacob said
        to his sons, "Why do you look at one another?"
042:002 He said, "Behold, I have heard that there is grain in Egypt.
        Go down there, and buy for us from there, so that we may live,
        and not die."
042:003 Joseph's ten brothers went down to buy grain from Egypt.
042:004 But Jacob didn't send Benjamin, Joseph's brother, with his brothers;
        for he said, "Lest perhaps harm happen to him."
042:005 The sons of Israel came to buy among those who came,
        for the famine was in the land of Canaan.
042:006 Joseph was the governor over the land.  It was he who sold
        to all the people of the land.  Joseph's brothers came,
        and bowed themselves down to him with their faces to the earth.
042:007 Joseph saw his brothers, and he recognized them, but acted
        like a stranger to them, and spoke roughly with them.
        He said to them, "Where did you come from?"  They said,
        "From the land of Canaan to buy food."
042:008 Joseph recognized his brothers, but they didn't recognize him.
042:009 Joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed about them,
        and said to them, "You are spies!  You have come to see
        the nakedness of the land."
042:010 They said to him, "No, my lord, but your servants have come
        to buy food.
042:011 We are all one man's sons; we are honest men.  Your servants
        are not spies."
042:012 He said to them, "No, but you have come to see the nakedness
        of the land."
042:013 They said, "We, your servants, are twelve brothers, the sons
        of one man in the land of Canaan; and behold, the youngest
        is this day with our father, and one is no more."
042:014 Joseph said to them, "It is like I told you, saying, 'You are spies.'
042:015 By this you shall be tested.  By the life of Pharaoh,
        you shall not go forth from here, unless your youngest
        brother comes here.
042:016 Send one of you, and let him get your brother, and you shall be bound,
        that your words may be tested, whether there is truth in you,
        or else by the life of Pharaoh surely you are spies."
042:017 He put them all together into custody for three days.
042:018 Joseph said to them the third day, "Do this, and live,
        for I fear God.
042:019 If you are honest men, then let one of your brothers be bound
        in your prison; but you go, carry grain for the famine
        of your houses.
042:020 Bring your youngest brother to me; so will your words be verified,
        and you won't die."  They did so.
042:021 They said one to another, "We are certainly guilty concerning
        our brother, in that we saw the distress of his soul,
        when he begged us, and we wouldn't listen.  Therefore this
        distress has come upon us."
042:022 Reuben answered them, saying, "Didn't I tell you, saying,
        'Don't sin against the child,' and you wouldn't listen?
        Therefore also, behold, his blood is required."
042:023 They didn't know that Joseph understood them; for there was
        an interpreter between them.
042:024 He turned himself away from them, and wept.  Then he returned
        to them, and spoke to them, and took Simeon from among them,
        and bound him before their eyes.
042:025 Then Joseph gave a command to fill their bags with grain,
        and to restore every man's money into his sack, and to give
        them food for the way.  So it was done to them.
042:026 They loaded their donkeys with their grain, and departed from there.
042:027 As one of them opened his sack to give his donkey food in the
        lodging place, he saw his money.  Behold, it was in the mouth
        of his sack.
042:028 He said to his brothers, "My money is restored!  Behold, it is
        in my sack!"  Their hearts failed them, and they turned
        trembling one to another, saying, "What is this that God has
        done to us?"
042:029 They came to Jacob their father, to the land of Canaan,
        and told him all that had happened to them, saying,
042:030 "The man, the lord of the land, spoke roughly with us,
        and took us for spies of the country.
042:031 We said to him, 'We are honest men.  We are no spies.
042:032 We are twelve brothers, sons of our father; one is no more,
        and the youngest is this day with our father in the land of Canaan.'
042:033 The man, the lord of the land, said to us, 'By this I will know
        that you are honest men:  leave one of your brothers with me,
        and take grain for the famine of your houses, and go your way.
042:034 Bring your youngest brother to me.  Then I will know
        that you are not spies, but that you are honest men.
        So I will deliver your brother to you, and you shall trade
        in the land.'"
042:035 It happened as they emptied their sacks, that behold, every man's
        bundle of money was in his sack.  When they and their father
        saw their bundles of money, they were afraid.
042:036 Jacob, their father, said to them, "You have bereaved me
        of my children!  Joseph is no more, Simeon is no more,
        and you want to take Benjamin away.  All these things
        are against me."
042:037 Reuben spoke to his father, saying, "Kill my two sons,
        if I don't bring him to you.  Entrust him to my care,
        and I will bring him to you again."
042:038 He said, "My son shall not go down with you; for his brother
        is dead, and he only is left.  If harm happens to him along
        the way in which you go, then you will bring down my gray
        hairs with sorrow to Sheol."
043:001 The famine was severe in the land.
043:002 It happened, when they had eaten up the grain which they had
        brought out of Egypt, their father said to them, "Go again,
        buy us a little more food."
043:003 Judah spoke to him, saying, "The man solemnly warned us, saying,
        'You shall not see my face, unless your brother is with you.'
043:004 If you'll send our brother with us, we'll go down and buy you food,
043:005 but if you'll not send him, we'll not go down, for the man
        said to us, 'You shall not see my face, unless your brother
        is with you.'"
043:006 Israel said, "Why did you treat me so badly, telling the man
        that you had another brother?"
043:007 They said, "The man asked directly concerning ourselves,
        and concerning our relatives, saying, 'Is your father still alive?
        Have you another brother?'  We just answered his questions.
        Is there any way we could know that he would say,
        'Bring your brother down?'"
043:008 Judah said to Israel, his father, "Send the boy with me,
        and we'll get up and go, so that we may live, and not die,
        both we, and you, and also our little ones.
043:009 I'll be collateral for him.  From my hand will you require him.
        If I don't bring him to you, and set him before you,
        then let me bear the blame forever,
043:010 for if we hadn't delayed, surely we would have returned a second
        time by now."
043:011 Their father, Israel, said to them, "If it must be so, then do this.
        Take from the choice fruits of the land in your bags, and carry
        down a present for the man, a little balm, a little honey,
        spices and myrrh, nuts, and almonds;
043:012 and take double money in your hand, and take back
        the money that was returned in the mouth of your sacks.
        Perhaps it was an oversight.
043:013 Take your brother also, get up, and return to the man.
043:014 May God Almighty give you mercy before the man,
        that he may release to you your other brother and Benjamin.
        If I am bereaved of my children, I am bereaved."
043:015 The men took that present, and they took double money in
        their hand, and Benjamin; and got up, went down to Egypt,
        and stood before Joseph.
043:016 When Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the steward of
        his house, "Bring the men into the house, and butcher an animal,
        and make ready; for the men will dine with me at noon."
043:017 The man did as Joseph commanded, and the man brought the men
        to Joseph's house.
043:018 The men were afraid, because they were brought to Joseph's house;
        and they said, "Because of the money that was returned in our
        sacks at the first time, we're brought in; that he may seek
        occasion against us, attack us, and seize us as slaves,
        along with our donkeys."
043:019 They came near to the steward of Joseph's house, and they
        spoke to him at the door of the house,
043:020 and said, "Oh, my lord, we indeed came down the first time
        to buy food.
043:021 When we came to the lodging place, we opened our sacks,
        and behold, every man's money was in the mouth of his sack,
        our money in full weight.  We have brought it back in our hand.
043:022 We have brought down other money in our hand to buy food.
        We don't know who put our money in our sacks."
043:023 He said, "Peace be to you.  Don't be afraid.  Your God,
        and the God of your father, has given you treasure in your sacks.
        I received your money."  He brought Simeon out to them.
043:024 The man brought the men into Joseph's house, and gave them water,
        and they washed their feet.  He gave their donkeys fodder.
043:025 They made ready the present for Joseph's coming at noon,
        for they heard that they should eat bread there.
043:026 When Joseph came home, they brought him the present which was
        in their hand into the house, and bowed themselves down to him
        to the earth.
043:027 He asked them of their welfare, and said, "Is your father well,
        the old man of whom you spoke?  Is he yet alive?"
043:028 They said, "Your servant, our father, is well.  He is still alive."
        They bowed the head, and did homage.
043:029 He lifted up his eyes, and saw Benjamin, his brother,
        his mother's son, and said, "Is this your youngest brother,
        of whom you spoke to me?"  He said, "God be gracious
        to you, my son."
043:030 Joseph hurried, for his heart yearned over his brother;
        and he sought a place to weep.  He entered into his room,
        and wept there.
043:031 He washed his face, and came out.  He controlled himself,
        and said, "Serve the meal."
043:032 They served him by himself, and them by themselves,
        and the Egyptians, that ate with him, by themselves,
        because the Egyptians don't eat bread with the Hebrews,
        for that is an abomination to the Egyptians.
043:033 They sat before him, the firstborn according to his birthright,
        and the youngest according to his youth, and the men marveled
        one with another.
043:034 He sent portions to them from before him, but Benjamin's
        portion was five times as much as any of theirs.
        They drank, and were merry with him.
044:001 He commanded the steward of his house, saying, "Fill the men's
        sacks with food, as much as they can carry, and put every
        man's money in his sack's mouth.
044:002 Put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack's mouth of the youngest,
        with his grain money."  He did according to the word that
        Joseph had spoken.
044:003 As soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away,
        they and their donkeys.
044:004 When they had gone out of the city, and were not yet far off,
        Joseph said to his steward, "Up, follow after the men.
        When you overtake them, ask them, 'Why have you rewarded
        evil for good?
044:005 Isn't this that from which my lord drinks, and by which
        he indeed divines?  You have done evil in so doing.'"
044:006 He overtook them, and he spoke these words to them.
044:007 They said to him, "Why does my lord speak such words as these?
        Far be it from your servants that they should do such a thing!
044:008 Behold, the money, which we found in our sacks' mouths, we brought
        again to you out of the land of Canaan.  How then should we
        steal silver or gold out of your lord's house?
044:009 With whoever of your servants it be found, let him die,
        and we also will be my lord's bondservants."
044:010 He said, "Now also let it be according to your words:
        he with whom it is found will be my bondservant; and you
        will be blameless."
044:011 Then they hurried, and every man took his sack down to the ground,
        and every man opened his sack.
044:012 He searched, beginning with the eldest, and ending at the youngest.
        The cup was found in Benjamin's sack.
044:013 Then they tore their clothes, and every man loaded his donkey,
        and returned to the city.
044:014 Judah and his brothers came to Joseph's house, and he was
        still there.  They fell on the ground before him.
044:015 Joseph said to them, "What deed is this that you have done?
        Don't you know that such a man as I can indeed divine?"
044:016 Judah said, "What will we tell my lord?  What will we speak?
        Or how will we clear ourselves?  God has found out the iniquity
        of your servants.  Behold, we are my lord's bondservants,
        both we, and he also in whose hand the cup is found."
044:017 He said, "Far be it from me that I should do so.  The man
        in whose hand the cup is found, he will be my bondservant;
        but as for you, go up in peace to your father."
044:018 Then Judah came near to him, and said, "Oh, my lord,
        please let your servant speak a word in my lord's ears,
        and don't let your anger burn against your servant;
        for you are even as Pharaoh.
044:019 My lord asked his servants, saying, 'Have you a father,
        or a brother?'
044:020 We said to my lord, 'We have a father, an old man, and a child
        of his old age, a little one; and his brother is dead,
        and he alone is left of his mother; and his father loves him.'
044:021 You said to your servants, 'Bring him down to me, that I may
        set my eyes on him.'
044:022 We said to my lord, 'The boy can't leave his father:
        for if he should leave his father, his father would die.'
044:023 You said to your servants, 'Unless your youngest brother comes
        down with you, you will see my face no more.'
044:024 It happened when we came up to your servant my father,
        we told him the words of my lord.
044:025 Our father said, 'Go again, buy us a little food.'
044:026 We said, 'We can't go down.  If our youngest brother is with us,
        then we will go down:  for we may not see the man's face,
        unless our youngest brother is with us.'
044:027 Your servant, my father, said to us, 'You know that my wife
        bore me two sons:
044:028 and the one went out from me, and I said, "Surely he is torn
        in pieces;" and I haven't seen him since.
044:029 If you take this one also from me, and harm happens to him,
        you will bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to Sheol.'
044:030 Now therefore when I come to your servant my father,
        and the boy is not with us; seeing that his life is bound up
        in the boy's life;
044:031 it will happen, when he sees that the boy is no more,
        that he will die.  Your servants will bring down the gray
        hairs of your servant, our father, with sorrow to Sheol.
044:032 For your servant became collateral for the boy to my father,
        saying, 'If I don't bring him to you, then I will bear
        the blame to my father forever.'
044:033 Now therefore, please let your servant stay instead of the boy,
        a bondservant to my lord; and let the boy go up with his brothers.
044:034 For how will I go up to my father, if the boy isn't with me?--
        lest I see the evil that will come on my father."
045:001 Then Joseph couldn't control himself before all those who stood
        before him, and he cried, "Cause every man to go out from me!"
        No one else stood with him, while Joseph made himself known
        to his brothers.
045:002 He wept aloud.  The Egyptians heard, and the house of Pharaoh heard.
045:003 Joseph said to his brothers, "I am Joseph!  Does my father
        still live?"  His brothers couldn't answer him; for they
        were terrified at his presence.
045:004 Joseph said to his brothers, "Come near to me, please."
        They came near.  "He said, I am Joseph, your brother,
        whom you sold into Egypt.
045:005 Now don't be grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that you sold
        me here, for God sent me before you to preserve life.
045:006 For these two years the famine has been in the land,
        and there are yet five years, in which there will be neither
        plowing nor harvest.
045:007 God sent me before you to preserve for you a remnant in the earth,
        and to save you alive by a great deliverance.
045:008 So now it wasn't you who sent me here, but God, and he has
        made me a father to Pharaoh, lord of all his house, and ruler
        over all the land of Egypt.
045:009 Hurry, and go up to my father, and tell him, 'This is what
        your son Joseph says, "God has made me lord of all Egypt.
        Come down to me.  Don't wait.
045:010 You shall dwell in the land of Goshen, and you will be near
        to me, you, your children, your children's children, your flocks,
        your herds, and all that you have.
045:011 There I will nourish you; for there are yet five years of famine;
        lest you come to poverty, you, and your household, and all
        that you have."'
045:012 Behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin,
        that it is my mouth that speaks to you.
045:013 You shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt,
        and of all that you have seen.  You shall hurry and bring
        my father down here."
045:014 He fell on his brother Benjamin's neck, and wept, and Benjamin
        wept on his neck.
045:015 He kissed all his brothers, and wept on them.  After that his
        brothers talked with him.
045:016 The report of it was heard in Pharaoh's house, saying,
        "Joseph's brothers have come."  It pleased Pharaoh well,
        and his servants.
045:017 Pharaoh said to Joseph, "Tell your brothers, 'Do this.
        Load your animals, and go, travel to the land of Canaan.
045:018 Take your father and your households, and come to me,
        and I will give you the good of the land of Egypt, and you
        will eat the fat of the land.'
045:019 Now you are commanded:  do this.  Take wagons out of the land
        of Egypt for your little ones, and for your wives, and bring
        your father, and come.
045:020 Also, don't concern yourselves about your belongings,
        for the good of all of the land of Egypt is yours."
045:021 The sons of Israel did so.  Joseph gave them wagons,
        according to the commandment of Pharaoh, and gave them
        provision for the way.
045:022 He gave each one of them changes of clothing, but to Benjamin he gave
        three hundred pieces of silver and five changes of clothing.
045:023 To his father, he sent after this manner:  ten donkeys loaded
        with the good things of Egypt, and ten female donkeys loaded
        with grain and bread and provision for his father by the way.
045:024 So he sent his brothers away, and they departed.
        He said to them, "See that you don't quarrel on the way."
045:025 They went up out of Egypt, and came into the land of Canaan,
        to Jacob their father.
045:026 They told him, saying, "Joseph is still alive, and he is
        ruler over all the land of Egypt."  His heart fainted,
        for he didn't believe them.
045:027 They told him all the words of Joseph, which he had said to them.
        When he saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him,
        the spirit of Jacob, their father, revived.
045:028 Israel said, "It is enough.  Joseph my son is still alive.
        I will go and see him before I die."
046:001 Israel traveled with all that he had, and came to Beersheba,
        and offered sacrifices to the God of his father, Isaac.
046:002 God spoke to Israel in the visions of the night, and said,
        "Jacob, Jacob!"  He said, "Here I am."
046:003 He said, "I am God, the God of your father.  Don't be afraid to go
        down into Egypt, for there I will make of you a great nation.
046:004 I will go down with you into Egypt.  I will also surely bring
        you up again.  Joseph will close your eyes."
046:005 Jacob rose up from Beersheba, and the sons of Israel carried Jacob,
        their father, their little ones, and their wives, in the wagons
        which Pharaoh had sent to carry him.
046:006 They took their livestock, and their goods, which they had gotten
        in the land of Canaan, and came into Egypt--Jacob, and all
        his seed with him,
046:007 his sons, and his sons' sons with him, his daughters,
        and his sons' daughters, and he brought all his seed with
        him into Egypt.
046:008 These are the names of the children of Israel, who came
        into Egypt, Jacob and his sons:  Reuben, Jacob's firstborn.
046:009 The sons of Reuben:  Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi.
046:010 The sons of Simeon:  Jemuel, Jamin, Ohad, Jachin, Zohar, and Shaul
        the son of a Canaanite woman.
046:011 The sons of Levi:  Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
046:012 The sons of Judah:  Er, Onan, Shelah, Perez, and Zerah;
        but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan.  The sons of Perez
        were Hezron and Hamul.
046:013 The sons of Issachar:  Tola, Puvah, Iob, and Shimron.
046:014 The sons of Zebulun:  Sered, Elon, and Jahleel.
046:015 These are the sons of Leah, whom she bore to Jacob in Paddan Aram,
        with his daughter Dinah.  All the souls of his sons and his
        daughters were thirty-three.
046:016 The sons of Gad:  Ziphion, Haggi, Shuni, Ezbon, Eri, Arodi,
        and Areli.
046:017 The sons of Asher:  Imnah, Ishvah, Ishvi, Beriah, and Serah
        their sister.  The sons of Beriah:  Heber and Malchiel.
046:018 These are the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to Leah,
        his daughter, and these she bore to Jacob, even sixteen souls.
046:019 The sons of Rachel, Jacob's wife:  Joseph and Benjamin.
046:020 To Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh and Ephraim,
        whom Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera, priest of On,
        bore to him.
046:021 The sons of Benjamin:  Bela, Becher, Ashbel, Gera, Naaman,
        Ehi, Rosh, Muppim, Huppim, and Ard.
046:022 These are the sons of Rachel, who were born to Jacob:
        all the souls were fourteen.
046:023 The son of Dan:  Hushim.
046:024 The sons of Naphtali:  Jahzeel, Guni, Jezer, and Shillem.
046:025 These are the sons of Bilhah, whom Laban gave to Rachel, his daughter,
        and these she bore to Jacob:  all the souls were seven.
046:026 All the souls who came with Jacob into Egypt, who were his
        direct descendants, besides Jacob's sons' wives, all the
        souls were sixty-six.
046:027 The sons of Joseph, who were born to him in Egypt, were two souls.
        All the souls of the house of Jacob, who came into Egypt,
        were seventy.
046:028 He sent Judah before him to Joseph, to show the way before him
        to Goshen, and they came into the land of Goshen.
046:029 Joseph made ready his chariot, and went up to meet Israel,
        his father, in Goshen.  He presented himself to him,
        and fell on his neck, and wept on his neck a good while.
046:030 Israel said to Joseph, "Now let me die, since I have seen
        your face, that you are still alive."
046:031 Joseph said to his brothers, and to his father's house,
        "I will go up, and speak with Pharaoh, and will tell him,
        'My brothers, and my father's house, who were in the land
        of Canaan, have come to me.
046:032 These men are shepherds, for they have been keepers of livestock,
        and they have brought their flocks, and their herds,
        and all that they have.'
046:033 It will happen, when Pharaoh summons you, and will say,
        'What is your occupation?'
046:034 that you shall say, 'Your servants have been keepers of livestock
        from our youth even until now, both we, and our fathers:'
        that you may dwell in the land of Goshen; for every shepherd
        is an abomination to the Egyptians."
047:001 Then Joseph went in and told Pharaoh, and said, "My father
        and my brothers, with their flocks, their herds, and all that
        they own, have come out of the land of Canaan; and behold,
        they are in the land of Goshen."
047:002 From among his brothers he took five men, and presented
        them to Pharaoh.
047:003 Pharaoh said to his brothers, "What is your occupation?"
        They said to Pharaoh, "Your servants are shepherds, both we,
        and our fathers."
047:004 They said to Pharaoh, "We have come to live as foreigners in
        the land, for there is no pasture for your servants' flocks.
        For the famine is severe in the land of Canaan.  Now therefore,
        please let your servants dwell in the land of Goshen."
047:005 Pharaoh spoke to Joseph, saying, "Your father and your brothers
        have come to you.
047:006 The land of Egypt is before you.  Make your father and your
        brothers dwell in the best of the land.  Let them dwell
        in the land of Goshen.  If you know any able men among them,
        then put them in charge of my livestock."
047:007 Joseph brought in Jacob, his father, and set him before Pharaoh,
        and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.
047:008 Pharaoh said to Jacob, "How many are the days of the years
        of your life?"
047:009 Jacob said to Pharaoh, "The days of the years of my pilgrimage
        are one hundred thirty years.  Few and evil have been
        the days of the years of my life, and they have not attained
        to the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days
        of their pilgrimage."
047:010 Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out from the presence of Pharaoh.
047:011 Joseph placed his father and his brothers, and gave them
        a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land,
        in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded.
047:012 Joseph nourished his father, his brothers, and all of his
        father's household, with bread, according to their families.
047:013 There was no bread in all the land; for the famine was very severe,
        so that the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan fainted
        by reason of the famine.
047:014 Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land of Egypt,
        and in the land of Canaan, for the grain which they bought:
        and Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh's house.
047:015 When the money was all spent in the land of Egypt, and in
        the land of Canaan, all the Egyptians came to Joseph, and said,
        "Give us bread, for why should we die in your presence?
        For our money fails."
047:016 Joseph said, "Give me your livestock; and I will give you food
        for your livestock, if your money is gone."
047:017 They brought their livestock to Joseph, and Joseph gave
        them bread in exchange for the horses, and for the flocks,
        and for the herds, and for the donkeys:  and he fed them
        with bread in exchange for all their livestock for that year.
047:018 When that year was ended, they came to him the second year,
        and said to him, "We will not hide from my lord how our money
        is all spent, and the herds of livestock are my lord's. There
        is nothing left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies,
        and our lands.
047:019 Why should we die before your eyes, both we and our land?
        Buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land will
        be servants to Pharaoh.  Give us seed, that we may live,
        and not die, and that the land won't be desolate."
047:020 So Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh,
        for the Egyptians sold every man his field, because the famine
        was severe on them, and the land became Pharaoh's.
047:021 As for the people, he moved them to the cities from one end
        of the border of Egypt even to the other end of it.
047:022 Only he didn't buy the land of the priests, for the priests had a
        portion from Pharaoh, and ate their portion which Pharaoh gave them.
        That is why they didn't sell their land.
047:023 Then Joseph said to the people, "Behold, I have bought you
        and your land today for Pharaoh.  Behold, here is seed for you,
        and you shall sow the land.
047:024 It will happen at the harvests, that you shall give a fifth
        to Pharaoh, and four parts will be your own, for seed
        of the field, for your food, for them of your households,
        and for food for your little ones."
047:025 They said, "You have saved our lives!  Let us find favor
        in the sight of my lord, and we will be Pharaoh's servants."
047:026 Joseph made it a statute concerning the land of Egypt
        to this day, that Pharaoh should have the fifth.
        Only the land of the priests alone didn't become Pharaoh's.
047:027 Israel lived in the land of Egypt, in the land of Goshen;
        and they got themselves possessions therein, and were fruitful,
        and multiplied exceedingly.
047:028 Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years.
        So the days of Jacob, the years of his life, were one
        hundred forty-seven years.
047:029 The time drew near that Israel must die, and he called his son Joseph,
        and said to him, "If now I have found favor in your sight, please put
        your hand under my thigh, and deal kindly and truly with me.
        Please don't bury me in Egypt,
047:030 but when I sleep with my fathers, you shall carry me
        out of Egypt, and bury me in their burying place."
        He said, "I will do as you have said."
047:031 He said, "Swear to me," and he swore to him.  Israel bowed
        himself on the bed's head.
048:001 It happened after these things, that someone said to Joseph, "Behold,
        your father is sick."  He took with him his two sons,
        Manasseh and Ephraim.
048:002 Someone told Jacob, and said, "Behold, your son Joseph comes to you,"
        and Israel strengthened himself, and sat on the bed.
048:003 Jacob said to Joseph, "God Almighty appeared to me at Luz
        in the land of Canaan, and blessed me,
048:004 and said to me, 'Behold, I will make you fruitful, and multiply you,
        and I will make of you a company of peoples, and will give this
        land to your seed after you for an everlasting possession.'
048:005 Now your two sons, who were born to you in the land of Egypt
        before I came to you into Egypt, are mine; Ephraim and Manasseh,
        even as Reuben and Simeon, will be mine.
048:006 Your issue, who you become the father of after them, will be yours.
        They will be called after the name of their brothers
        in their inheritance.
048:007 As for me, when I came from Paddan, Rachel died by me in the land
        of Canaan in the way, when there was still some distance to come
        to Ephrath, and I buried her there in the way to Ephrath
        (the same is Bethlehem)."
048:008 Israel saw Joseph's sons, and said, "Who are these?"
048:009 Joseph said to his father, "They are my sons, whom God
        has given me here."  He said, "Please bring them to me,
        and I will bless them."
048:010 Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age, so that he couldn't see.
        He brought them near to him; and he kissed them,
        and embraced them.
048:011 Israel said to Joseph, "I didn't think I would see your face,
        and behold, God has let me see your seed also."
048:012 Joseph brought them out from between his knees, and he bowed
        himself with his face to the earth.
048:013 Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward Israel's
        left hand, and Manasseh in his left hand toward Israel's
        right hand, and brought them near to him.
048:014 Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it on Ephraim's head,
        who was the younger, and his left hand on Manasseh's head,
        guiding his hands knowingly, for Manasseh was the firstborn.
048:015 He blessed Joseph, and said, "The God before whom my fathers
        Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God who has fed me all my life
        long to this day,
048:016 the angel who has redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads,
        and let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers
        Abraham and Isaac.  Let them grow into a multitude in the midst
        of the earth."
048:017 When Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand on the head
        of Ephraim, it displeased him.  He held up his father's hand,
        to remove it from Ephraim's head to Manasseh's head.
048:018 Joseph said to his father, "Not so, my father; for this is
        the firstborn; put your right hand on his head."
048:019 His father refused, and said, "I know, my son, I know.
        He also will become a people, and he also will be great.
        However, his younger brother will be greater than he,
        and his seed will become a multitude of nations."
048:020 He blessed them that day, saying, "In you will Israel bless,
        saying, 'God make you as Ephraim and as Manasseh'" He set
        Ephraim before Manasseh.
048:021 Israel said to Joseph, "Behold, I am dying, but God will be
        with you, and bring you again to the land of your fathers.
048:022 Moreover I have given to you one portion above your brothers,
        which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword
        and with my bow."
049:001 Jacob called to his sons, and said:  "Gather yourselves together,
        that I may tell you that which will happen to you in the
        days to come.
049:002 Assemble yourselves, and hear, you sons of Jacob.
        Listen to Israel, your father.
049:003 "Reuben, you are my firstborn, my might, and the beginning
        of my strength; excelling in dignity, and excelling in power.
049:004 Boiling over as water, you shall not excel; because you
        went up to your father's bed, then defiled it.
        He went up to my couch.
049:005 "Simeon and Levi are brothers.  Their swords are weapons of violence.
049:006 My soul, don't come into their council.  My glory, don't be
        united to their assembly; for in their anger they killed men.
        In their self-will they hamstrung oxen.
049:007 Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath,
        for it was cruel.  I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter
        them in Israel.
049:008 "Judah, your brothers will praise you.  Your hand will be
        on the neck of your enemies.  Your father's sons will bow
        down before you.
049:009 Judah is a lion's cub.  From the prey, my son, you have gone up.
        He stooped down, he crouched as a lion, as a lioness.
        Who will rouse him up?
049:010 The scepter will not depart from Judah, nor the ruler's staff
        from between his feet, until he comes to whom it belongs.
        To him will the obedience of the peoples be.
049:011 Binding his foal to the vine, his donkey's colt to the choice vine;
        he has washed his garments in wine, his robes in the
        blood of grapes.
049:012 His eyes will be red with wine, his teeth white with milk.
049:013 "Zebulun will dwell at the haven of the sea.  He will be for
        a haven of ships.  His border will be on Sidon.
049:014 "Issachar is a strong donkey, lying down between the saddlebags.
049:015 He saw a resting place, that it was good, the land,
        that it was pleasant.  He bows his shoulder to the burden,
        and becomes a servant doing forced labor.
049:016 "Dan will judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel.
049:017 Dan will be a serpent in the way, an adder in the path,
        That bites the horse's heels, so that his rider falls backward.
049:018 I have waited for your salvation, Yahweh.
049:019 "A troop will press on Gad, but he will press on their heel.
049:020 "Asher's food will be rich.  He will yield royal dainties.
049:021 "Naphtali is a doe set free, who bears beautiful fawns.
049:022 "Joseph is a fruitful vine, a fruitful vine by a spring.
        His branches run over the wall.
049:023 The archers have sorely grieved him, shot at him,
        and persecute him:
049:024 But his bow remained strong.  The arms of his hands were
        made strong, by the hands of the Mighty One of Jacob,
        (from there is the shepherd, the stone of Israel),
049:025 even by the God of your father, who will help you; by the Almighty,
        who will bless you, with blessings of heaven above,
        blessings of the deep that lies below, blessings of the breasts,
        and of the womb.
049:026 The blessings of your father have prevailed above the blessings
        of your ancestors, above the boundaries of the ancient hills.
        They will be on the head of Joseph, on the crown of the head
        of him who is separated from his brothers.
049:027 "Benjamin is a ravenous wolf.  In the morning he will devour
        the prey.  At evening he will divide the spoil."
049:028 All these are the twelve tribes of Israel, and this
        is what their father spoke to them and blessed them.
        He blessed everyone according to his blessing.
049:029 He charged them, and said to them, "I am to be gathered to my people.
        Bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field
        of Ephron the Hittite,
049:030 in the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is before Mamre,
        in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the field
        from Ephron the Hittite as a burial place.
049:031 There they buried Abraham and Sarah, his wife.  There they
        buried Isaac and Rebekah, his wife, and there I buried Leah:
049:032 the field and the cave that is therein, which was purchased
        from the children of Heth."
049:033 When Jacob made an end of charging his sons, he gathered
        up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the spirit,
        and was gathered to his people.
050:001 Joseph fell on his father's face, wept on him, and kissed him.
050:002 Joseph commanded his servants, the physicians, to embalm his father;
        and the physicians embalmed Israel.
050:003 Forty days were fulfilled for him, for that is how many
        the days it takes to embalm.  The Egyptians wept for him
        for seventy days.
050:004 When the days of weeping for him were past, Joseph spoke
        to the house of Pharaoh, saying, "If now I have found favor
        in your eyes, please speak in the ears of Pharaoh, saying,
050:005 'My father made me swear, saying, "Behold, I am dying.  Bury me
        in my grave which I have dug for myself in the land of Canaan."
        Now therefore, please let me go up and bury my father,
        and I will come again.'"
050:006 Pharaoh said, "Go up, and bury your father, just like he
        made you swear."
050:007 Joseph went up to bury his father; and with him went up
        all the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house,
        all the elders of the land of Egypt,
050:008 all the house of Joseph, his brothers, and his father's house.
        Only their little ones, their flocks, and their herds,
        they left in the land of Goshen.
050:009 There went up with him both chariots and horsemen.
        It was a very great company.
050:010 They came to the threshing floor of Atad, which is beyond the Jordan,
        and there they lamented with a very great and sore lamentation.
        He mourned for his father seven days.
050:011 When the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, saw the mourning
        in the floor of Atad, they said, "This is a grievous mourning
        by the Egyptians."  Therefore, the name of it was called
        Abel Mizraim, which is beyond the Jordan.
050:012 His sons did to him just as he commanded them,
050:013 for his sons carried him into the land of Canaan, and buried
        him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, which Abraham
        bought with the field, for a possession of a burial site,
        from Ephron the Hittite, before Mamre.
050:014 Joseph returned into Egypt--he, and his brothers, and all
        that went up with him to bury his father, after he had
        buried his father.
050:015 When Joseph's brothers saw that their father was dead, they said,
        "It may be that Joseph will hate us, and will fully pay us
        back for all of the evil which we did to him."
050:016 They sent a message to Joseph, saying, "Your father commanded
        before he died, saying,
050:017 'You shall tell Joseph, "Now please forgive the disobedience
        of your brothers, and their sin, because they did evil to you."'
        Now, please forgive the disobedience of the servants of the God
        of your father."  Joseph wept when they spoke to him.
050:018 His brothers also went and fell down before his face;
        and they said, "Behold, we are your servants."
050:019 Joseph said to them, "Don't be afraid, for am I in the place of God?
050:020 As for you, you meant evil against me, but God meant it for good,
        to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save many people alive.
050:021 Now therefore don't be afraid.  I will nourish you and your
        little ones."  He comforted them, and spoke kindly to them.
050:022 Joseph lived in Egypt, he, and his father's house.
        Joseph lived one hundred ten years.
050:023 Joseph saw Ephraim's children to the third generation.
        The children also of Machir, the son of Manasseh, were born
        on Joseph's knees.
050:024 Joseph said to his brothers, "I am dying, but God will surely
        visit you, and bring you up out of this land to the land
        which he swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob."
050:025 Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel, saying, "God will
        surely visit you, and you shall carry up my bones from here."
050:026 So Joseph died, being one hundred ten years old, and they
        embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.
Book 02 Exodus
001:001 Now these are the names of the sons of Israel, who came into Egypt
        (every man and his household came with Jacob):
001:002 Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah,
001:003 Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin,
001:004 Dan and Naphtali, Gad and Asher.
001:005 All the souls who came out of Jacob's body were seventy souls,
        and Joseph was in Egypt already.
001:006 Joseph died, as did all his brothers, and all that generation.
001:007 The children of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly,
        and multiplied, and grew exceedingly mighty; and the land
        was filled with them.
001:008 Now there arose a new king over Egypt, who didn't know Joseph.
001:009 He said to his people, "Behold, the people of the children
        of Israel are more and mightier than we.
001:010 Come, let us deal wisely with them, lest they multiply,
        and it happen that when any war breaks out, they also join
        themselves to our enemies, and fight against us, and escape
        out of the land."
001:011 Therefore they set taskmasters over them to afflict
        them with their burdens.  They built storage cities
        for Pharaoh:  Pithom and Raamses.
001:012 But the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied
        and the more they spread out.  They were grieved because of
        the children of Israel.
001:013 The Egyptians ruthlessly made the children of Israel serve,
001:014 and they made their lives bitter with hard service, in mortar
        and in brick, and in all manner of service in the field,
        all their service, in which they ruthlessly made them serve.
001:015 The king of Egypt spoke to the Hebrew midwives, of whom the name
        of the one was Shiphrah, and the name of the other Puah,
001:016 and he said, "When you perform the duty of a midwife
        to the Hebrew women, and see them on the birth stool;
        if it is a son, then you shall kill him; but if it is a daughter,
        then she shall live."
001:017 But the midwives feared God, and didn't do what the king
        of Egypt commanded them, but saved the baby boys alive.
001:018 The king of Egypt called for the midwives, and said to them,
        "Why have you done this thing, and have saved the boys alive?"
001:019 The midwives said to Pharaoh, "Because the Hebrew women
        aren't like the Egyptian women; for they are vigorous,
        and give birth before the midwife comes to them."
001:020 God dealt well with the midwives, and the people multiplied,
        and grew very mighty.
001:021 It happened, because the midwives feared God, that he
        gave them families.
001:022 Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, "You shall cast every
        son who is born into the river, and every daughter you
        shall save alive."
002:001 A man of the house of Levi went and took a daughter of Levi
        as his wife.
002:002 The woman conceived, and bore a son.  When she saw that he was
        a fine child, she hid him three months.
002:003 When she could no longer hide him, she took a papyrus
        basket for him, and coated it with tar and with pitch.
        She put the child in it, and laid it in the reeds by
        the river's bank.
002:004 His sister stood far off, to see what would be done to him.
002:005 Pharaoh's daughter came down to bathe at the river.
        Her maidens walked along by the riverside.  She saw the basket
        among the reeds, and sent her handmaid to get it.
002:006 She opened it, and saw the child, and behold, the baby cried.
        She had compassion on him, and said, "This is one of
        the Hebrews' children."
002:007 Then his sister said to Pharaoh's daughter, "Should I go
        and call a nurse for you from the Hebrew women, that she
        may nurse the child for you?"
002:008 Pharaoh's daughter said to her, "Go." The maiden went and called
        the child's mother.
002:009 Pharaoh's daughter said to her, "Take this child away,
        and nurse him for me, and I will give you your wages."
        The woman took the child, and nursed it.
002:010 The child grew, and she brought him to Pharaoh's daughter,
        and he became her son.  She named him Moses,{"Moses"
        sounds like the Hebrew for "draw out".} and said, "Because I
        drew him out of the water."
002:011 It happened in those days, when Moses had grown up,
        that he went out to his brothers, and looked at their burdens.
        He saw an Egyptian striking a Hebrew, one of his brothers.
002:012 He looked this way and that way, and when he saw that there
        was no one, he killed the Egyptian, and hid him in the sand.
002:013 He went out the second day, and behold, two men of the Hebrews
        were fighting with each other.  He said to him who did the wrong,
        "Why do you strike your fellow?"
002:014 He said, "Who made you a prince and a judge over us?  Do you plan
        to kill me, as you killed the Egyptian?"  Moses was afraid,
        and said, "Surely this thing is known."
002:015 Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to kill Moses.
        But Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh, and lived in the land
        of Midian, and he sat down by a well.
002:016 Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters.
        They came and drew water, and filled the troughs to water
        their father's flock.
002:017 The shepherds came and drove them away; but Moses stood up
        and helped them, and watered their flock.
002:018 When they came to Reuel, their father, he said, "How is it
        that you have returned so early today?"
002:019 They said, "An Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds,
        and moreover he drew water for us, and watered the flock."
002:020 He said to his daughters, "Where is he?  Why is it that you
        have left the man?  Call him, that he may eat bread."
002:021 Moses was content to dwell with the man.  He gave
        Moses Zipporah, his daughter.
002:022 She bore a son, and he named him Gershom,{"Gershom"
        sounds like the Hebrew for "an alien there."} for he said,
        "I have lived as a foreigner in a foreign land."
002:023 It happened in the course of those many days, that the king
        of Egypt died, and the children of Israel sighed because of
        the bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up to God
        because of the bondage.
002:024 God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant
        with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob.
002:025 God saw the children of Israel, and God was concerned about them.
003:001 Now Moses was keeping the flock of Jethro, his father-in-law,
        the priest of Midian, and he led the flock to the back
        of the wilderness, and came to God's mountain, to Horeb.
003:002 The angel of Yahweh appeared to him in a flame of fire out
        of the midst of a bush.  He looked, and behold, the bush
        burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed.
003:003 Moses said, "I will turn aside now, and see this great sight,
        why the bush is not burnt."
003:004 When Yahweh saw that he turned aside to see, God called to him
        out of the midst of the bush, and said, "Moses!  Moses!"  He said,
        "Here I am."
003:005 He said, "Don't come close.  Take your sandals off of your feet,
        for the place you are standing on is holy ground."
003:006 Moreover he said, "I am the God of your father, the God
        of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob."
        Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to look at God.
003:007 Yahweh said, "I have surely seen the affliction of my people who are
        in Egypt, and have heard their cry because of their taskmasters,
        for I know their sorrows.
003:008 I have come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians,
        and to bring them up out of that land to a good and large land,
        to a land flowing with milk and honey; to the place
        of the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite, the Perizzite,
        the Hivite, and the Jebusite.
003:009 Now, behold, the cry of the children of Israel has come to me.
        Moreover I have seen the oppression with which the
        Egyptians oppress them.
003:010 Come now therefore, and I will send you to Pharaoh,
        that you may bring forth my people, the children of Israel,
        out of Egypt."
003:011 Moses said to God, "Who am I, that I should go to Pharaoh,
        and that I should bring forth the children of Israel
        out of Egypt?"
003:012 He said, "Certainly I will be with you.  This will be the token
        to you, that I have sent you:  when you have brought forth
        the people out of Egypt, you shall serve God on this mountain."
003:013 Moses said to God, "Behold, when I come to the children
        of Israel, and tell them, 'The God of your fathers has
        sent me to you;' and they ask me, 'What is his name?'
        What should I tell them?"
003:014 God said to Moses, "I AM WHO I AM," and he said, "You shall tell
        the children of Israel this:  'I AM has sent me to you.'"
003:015 God said moreover to Moses, "You shall tell the children of
        Israel this, 'Yahweh, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham,
        the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has sent me to you.'
        This is my name forever, and this is my memorial to all generations.
003:016 Go, and gather the elders of Israel together, and tell them,
        'Yahweh, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac,
        and of Jacob, has appeared to me, saying, "I have surely
        visited you, and seen that which is done to you in Egypt;
003:017 and I have said, I will bring you up out of the affliction
        of Egypt to the land of the Canaanite, the Hittite,
        the Amorite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite,
        to a land flowing with milk and honey."'
003:018 They will listen to your voice, and you shall come, you and
        the elders of Israel, to the king of Egypt, and you shall
        tell him, 'Yahweh, the God of the Hebrews, has met with us.
        Now please let us go three days' journey into the wilderness,
        that we may sacrifice to Yahweh, our God.'
003:019 I know that the king of Egypt won't give you permission
        to go, no, not by a mighty hand.
003:020 I will put forth my hand and strike Egypt with all my wonders
        which I will do in the midst of it, and after that he will
        let you go.
003:021 I will give this people favor in the sight of the Egyptians,
        and it will happen that when you go, you shall not go empty-handed.
003:022 But every woman shall ask of her neighbor, and of her who visits
        her house, jewels of silver, jewels of gold, and clothing;
        and you shall put them on your sons, and on your daughters.
        You shall despoil the Egyptians.
004:001 Moses answered, "But, behold, they will not believe me,
        nor listen to my voice; for they will say, 'Yahweh has not
        appeared to you.'"
004:002 Yahweh said to him, "What is that in your hand?"
        He said, "A rod."
004:003 He said, "Throw it on the ground."  He threw it on the ground,
        and it became a snake; and Moses ran away from it.
004:004 Yahweh said to Moses, "Put forth your hand, and take it by the tail."
        He put forth his hand, and laid hold of it, and it became
        a rod in his hand.
004:005 "That they may believe that Yahweh, the God of their fathers,
        the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,
        has appeared to you."
004:006 Yahweh said furthermore to him, "Now put your hand inside
        your cloak."  He put his hand inside his cloak, and when he took
        it out, behold, his hand was leprous, as white as snow.
004:007 He said, "Put your hand inside your cloak again."
        He put his hand inside his cloak again, and when he took it out
        of his cloak, behold, it had turned again as his other flesh.
004:008 "It will happen, if they will neither believe you nor listen
        to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe
        the voice of the latter sign.
004:009 It will happen, if they will not believe even these two signs,
        neither listen to your voice, that you shall take
        of the water of the river, and pour it on the dry land.
        The water which you take out of the river will become blood
        on the dry land."
004:010 Moses said to Yahweh, "Oh, Lord, I am not eloquent,
        neither before now, nor since you have spoken to your servant;
        for I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue."
004:011 Yahweh said to him, "Who made man's mouth?  Or who makes one mute,
        or deaf, or seeing, or blind?  Isn't it I, Yahweh?
004:012 Now therefore go, and I will be with your mouth, and teach
        you what you shall speak."
004:013 He said, "Oh, Lord, please send someone else."
004:014 The anger of Yahweh was kindled against Moses, and he said,
        "What about Aaron, your brother, the Levite?  I know that he can
        speak well.  Also, behold, he comes forth to meet you.
        When he sees you, he will be glad in his heart.
004:015 You shall speak to him, and put the words in his mouth.
        I will be with your mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach
        you what you shall do.
004:016 He will be your spokesman to the people; and it will happen,
        that he will be to you a mouth, and you will be to him as God.
004:017 You shall take this rod in your hand, with which you shall
        do the signs."
004:018 Moses went and returned to Jethro his father-in-law,
        and said to him, "Please let me go and return to my brothers
        who are in Egypt, and see whether they are still alive."
        Jethro said to Moses, "Go in peace."
004:019 Yahweh said to Moses in Midian, "Go, return into Egypt;
        for all the men who sought your life are dead."
004:020 Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them on a donkey,
        and he returned to the land of Egypt.  Moses took God's rod
        in his hand.
004:021 Yahweh said to Moses, "When you go back into Egypt, see that you
        do before Pharaoh all the wonders which I have put in your hand,
        but I will harden his heart and he will not let the people go.
004:022 You shall tell Pharaoh, 'Thus says Yahweh, Israel is
        my son, my firstborn,
004:023 and I have said to you, "Let my son go, that he may serve me;"
        and you have refused to let him go.  Behold, I will kill
        your son, your firstborn.'"
004:024 It happened on the way at a lodging place, that Yahweh met
        him and wanted to kill him.
004:025 Then Zipporah took a flint, and cut off the foreskin of her son,
        and cast it at his feet; and she said, "Surely you are a
        bridegroom of blood to me."
004:026 So he let him alone.  Then she said, "You are a bridegroom
        of blood," because of the circumcision.
004:027 Yahweh said to Aaron, "Go into the wilderness to meet Moses."
        He went, and met him on God's mountain, and kissed him.
004:028 Moses told Aaron all the words of Yahweh with which he had
        sent him, and all the signs with which he had charged him.
004:029 Moses and Aaron went and gathered together all the elders
        of the children of Israel.
004:030 Aaron spoke all the words which Yahweh had spoken to Moses,
        and did the signs in the sight of the people.
004:031 The people believed, and when they heard that Yahweh had visited
        the children of Israel, and that he had seen their affliction,
        then they bowed their heads and worshiped.
005:001 Afterward Moses and Aaron came, and said to Pharaoh, "This is
        what Yahweh, the God of Israel, says, 'Let my people go,
        that they may hold a feast to me in the wilderness.'"
005:002 Pharaoh said, "Who is Yahweh, that I should listen to his voice
        to let Israel go?  I don't know Yahweh, and moreover I will
        not let Israel go."
005:003 They said, "The God of the Hebrews has met with us.
        Please let us go three days' journey into the wilderness,
        and sacrifice to Yahweh, our God, lest he fall on us
        with pestilence, or with the sword."
005:004 The king of Egypt said to them, "Why do you, Moses and Aaron,
        take the people from their work?  Get back to your burdens!"
005:005 Pharaoh said, "Behold, the people of the land are now many,
        and you make them rest from their burdens."
005:006 The same day Pharaoh commanded the taskmasters of the people,
        and their officers, saying,
005:007 "You shall no longer give the people straw to make brick, as before.
        Let them go and gather straw for themselves.
005:008 The number of the bricks, which they made before, you require
        from them.  You shall not diminish anything of it, for they
        are idle; therefore they cry, saying, 'Let us go and sacrifice
        to our God.'
005:009 Let heavier work be laid on the men, that they may labor therein;
        and don't let them pay any attention to lying words."
005:010 The taskmasters of the people went out, and their officers,
        and they spoke to the people, saying, This is what Pharaoh says:
        "I will not give you straw.
005:011 Go yourselves, get straw where you can find it, for nothing
        of your work shall be diminished."
005:012 So the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land
        of Egypt to gather stubble for straw.
005:013 The taskmasters were urgent saying, "Fulfill your work quota daily,
        as when there was straw!"
005:014 The officers of the children of Israel, whom Pharaoh's
        taskmasters had set over them, were beaten, and demanded,
        "Why haven't you fulfilled your quota both yesterday and today,
        in making brick as before?"
005:015 Then the officers of the children of Israel came and cried
        to Pharaoh, saying, "Why do you deal this way with your servants?
005:016 No straw is given to your servants, and they tell us,
        'Make brick!' and behold, your servants are beaten;
        but the fault is in your own people."
005:017 But he said, "You are idle!  You are idle!  Therefore you say,
        'Let us go and sacrifice to Yahweh.'
005:018 Go therefore now, and work, for no straw shall be given to you,
        yet shall you deliver the same number of bricks!"
005:019 The officers of the children of Israel saw that they were
        in trouble, when it was said, "You shall not diminish anything
        from your daily quota of bricks!"
005:020 They met Moses and Aaron, who stood in the way, as they came
        forth from Pharaoh:
005:021 and they said to them, "May Yahweh look at you, and judge,
        because you have made us a stench to be abhorred in the eyes
        of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword
        in their hand to kill us."
005:022 Moses returned to Yahweh, and said, "Lord, why have you brought
        trouble on this people?  Why is it that you have sent me?
005:023 For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in your name, he has
        brought trouble on this people; neither have you delivered
        your people at all."
006:001 Yahweh said to Moses, "Now you shall see what I will do to Pharaoh,
        for by a strong hand he shall let them go, and by a strong
        hand he shall drive them out of his land."
006:002 God spoke to Moses, and said to him, "I am Yahweh;
006:003 and I appeared to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, as God Almighty;
        but by my name Yahweh I was not known to them.
006:004 I have also established my covenant with them, to give them
        the land of Canaan, the land of their travels, in which they
        lived as aliens.
006:005 Moreover I have heard the groaning of the children of Israel,
        whom the Egyptians keep in bondage, and I have remembered
        my covenant.
006:006 Therefore tell the children of Israel, 'I am Yahweh, and I
        will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians,
        and I will rid you out of their bondage, and I will redeem
        you with an outstretched arm, and with great judgments:
006:007 and I will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a God;
        and you shall know that I am Yahweh your God, who brings you
        out from under the burdens of the Egyptians.
006:008 I will bring you into the land which I swore to give to Abraham,
        to Isaac, and to Jacob; and I will give it to you for a heritage:
        I am Yahweh.'"
006:009 Moses spoke so to the children of Israel, but they didn't listen
        to Moses for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.
006:010 Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,
006:011 "Go in, speak to Pharaoh king of Egypt, that he let the children
        of Israel go out of his land."
006:012 Moses spoke before Yahweh, saying, "Behold, the children of Israel
        haven't listened to me.  How then shall Pharaoh listen to me,
        who am of uncircumcised lips?"
006:013 Yahweh spoke to Moses and to Aaron, and gave them a charge
        to the children of Israel, and to Pharaoh king of Egypt,
        to bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt.
006:014 These are the heads of their fathers' houses.  The sons of Reuben
        the firstborn of Israel:  Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi;
        these are the families of Reuben.
006:015 The sons of Simeon:  Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin,
        and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanite woman;
        these are the families of Simeon.
006:016 These are the names of the sons of Levi according to
        their generations:  Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari; and the years
        of the life of Levi were one hundred thirty-seven years.
006:017 The sons of Gershon:  Libni and Shimei, according to their families.
006:018 The sons of Kohath:  Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron,
        and Uzziel; and the years of the life of Kohath were one
        hundred thirty-three years.
006:019 The sons of Merari:  Mahli and Mushi.  These are the families
        of the Levites according to their generations.
006:020 Amram took Jochebed his father's sister to himself as wife;
        and she bore him Aaron and Moses:  and the years of the life
        of Amram were a hundred and thirty-seven years.
006:021 The sons of Izhar:  Korah, and Nepheg, and Zichri.
006:022 The sons of Uzziel:  Mishael, and Elzaphan, and Sithri.
006:023 Aaron took Elisheba, the daughter of Amminadab,
        the sister of Nahshon, as his wife; and she bore him Nadab
        and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
006:024 The sons of Korah:  Assir, and Elkanah, and Abiasaph;
        these are the families of the Korahites.
006:025 Eleazar Aaron's son took one of the daughters of Putiel as his wife;
        and she bore him Phinehas.  These are the heads of the fathers'
        houses of the Levites according to their families.
006:026 These are that Aaron and Moses, to whom Yahweh said,
        "Bring out the children of Israel from the land of Egypt
        according to their armies."
006:027 These are those who spoke to Pharaoh king of Egypt,
        to bring out the children of Israel from Egypt.
        These are that Moses and Aaron.
006:028 It happened on the day when Yahweh spoke to Moses in the
        land of Egypt,
006:029 that Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, "I am Yahweh.
        Speak to Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I speak to you."
006:030 Moses said before Yahweh, "Behold, I am of uncircumcised lips,
        and how shall Pharaoh listen to me?"
007:001 Yahweh said to Moses, "Behold, I have made you as God to Pharaoh;
        and Aaron your brother shall be your prophet.
007:002 You shall speak all that I command you; and Aaron your brother
        shall speak to Pharaoh, that he let the children of Israel
        go out of his land.
007:003 I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and multiply my signs and my
        wonders in the land of Egypt.
007:004 But Pharaoh will not listen to you, and I will lay my hand on Egypt,
        and bring forth my armies, my people the children of Israel,
        out of the land of Egypt by great judgments.
007:005 The Egyptians shall know that I am Yahweh, when I stretch
        forth my hand on Egypt, and bring out the children of Israel
        from among them."
007:006 Moses and Aaron did so.  As Yahweh commanded them, so they did.
007:007 Moses was eighty years old, and Aaron eighty-three years old,
        when they spoke to Pharaoh.
007:008 Yahweh spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
007:009 "When Pharaoh speaks to you, saying, 'Perform a miracle!'
        then you shall tell Aaron, 'Take your rod, and cast it down
        before Pharaoh, that it become a serpent.'"
007:010 Moses and Aaron went in to Pharaoh, and they did so, as Yahweh
        had commanded:  and Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh
        and before his servants, and it became a serpent.
007:011 Then Pharaoh also called for the wise men and the sorcerers.
        They also, the magicians of Egypt, did in like manner
        with their enchantments.
007:012 For they cast down every man his rod, and they became serpents:
        but Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods.
007:013 Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he didn't listen to them;
        as Yahweh had spoken.
007:014 Yahweh said to Moses, "Pharaoh's heart is stubborn.
        He refuses to let the people go.
007:015 Go to Pharaoh in the morning.  Behold, he goes out to the water;
        and you shall stand by the river's bank to meet him;
        and the rod which was turned to a serpent you shall take
        in your hand.
007:016 You shall tell him, 'Yahweh, the God of the Hebrews, has sent
        me to you, saying, "Let my people go, that they may serve me
        in the wilderness:"  and behold, until now you haven't listened.
007:017 Thus says Yahweh, "In this you shall know that I am Yahweh.
        Behold, I will strike with the rod that is in my hand on the waters
        which are in the river, and they shall be turned to blood.
007:018 The fish that are in the river shall die, and the river shall
        become foul; and the Egyptians shall loathe to drink water
        from the river."'"
007:019 Yahweh said to Moses, "Tell Aaron, 'Take your rod,
        and stretch out your hand over the waters of Egypt,
        over their rivers, over their streams, and over their pools,
        and over all their ponds of water, that they may become blood;
        and there shall be blood throughout all the land of Egypt,
        both in vessels of wood and in vessels of stone.'"
007:020 Moses and Aaron did so, as Yahweh commanded; and he lifted
        up the rod, and struck the waters that were in the river,
        in the sight of Pharaoh, and in the sight of his servants;
        and all the waters that were in the river were turned to blood.
007:021 The fish that were in the river died; and the river became foul,
        and the Egyptians couldn't drink water from the river;
        and the blood was throughout all the land of Egypt.
007:022 The magicians of Egypt did in like manner with their enchantments;
        and Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he didn't listen to them;
        as Yahweh had spoken.
007:023 Pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he lay
        even this to heart.
007:024 All the Egyptians dug round about the river for water to drink;
        for they couldn't drink of the water of the river.
007:025 Seven days were fulfilled, after Yahweh had struck the river.
008:001 Yahweh spoke to Moses, Go in to Pharaoh, and tell him,
        "This is what Yahweh says, 'Let my people go, that they
        may serve me.
008:002 If you refuse to let them go, behold, I will plague all your
        borders with frogs:
008:003 and the river shall swarm with frogs, which shall go up and come
        into your house, and into your bedchamber, and on your bed,
        and into the house of your servants, and on your people,
        and into your ovens, and into your kneading troughs:
008:004 and the frogs shall come up both on you, and on your people,
        and on all your servants.'"
008:005 Yahweh said to Moses, "Tell Aaron, 'Stretch forth your hand with
        your rod over the rivers, over the streams, and over the pools,
        and cause frogs to come up on the land of Egypt.'"
008:006 Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt;
        and the frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt.
008:007 The magicians did in like manner with their enchantments,
        and brought up frogs on the land of Egypt.
008:008 Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, "Entreat Yahweh,
        that he take away the frogs from me, and from my people;
        and I will let the people go, that they may sacrifice to Yahweh."
008:009 Moses said to Pharaoh, "I give you the honor of setting
        the time that I should pray for you, and for your servants,
        and for your people, that the frogs be destroyed from you
        and your houses, and remain in the river only."
008:010 He said, "Tomorrow." He said, "Be it according to your word,
        that you may know that there is none like Yahweh our God.
008:011 The frogs shall depart from you, and from your houses,
        and from your servants, and from your people.  They shall
        remain in the river only."
008:012 Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh, and Moses cried to Yahweh
        concerning the frogs which he had brought on Pharaoh.
008:013 Yahweh did according to the word of Moses, and the frogs died
        out of the houses, out of the courts, and out of the fields.
008:014 They gathered them together in heaps, and the land stank.
008:015 But when Pharaoh saw that there was a respite, he hardened
        his heart, and didn't listen to them, as Yahweh had spoken.
008:016 Yahweh said to Moses, "Tell Aaron, 'Stretch out your rod,
        and strike the dust of the earth, that it may become lice
        throughout all the land of Egypt.'"
008:017 They did so; and Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod,
        and struck the dust of the earth, and there were lice on man,
        and on animal; all the dust of the earth became lice throughout
        all the land of Egypt.
008:018 The magicians tried with their enchantments to bring forth lice,
        but they couldn't. There were lice on man, and on animal.
008:019 Then the magicians said to Pharaoh, "This is the finger of God:"
        and Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he didn't listen to them;
        as Yahweh had spoken.
008:020 Yahweh said to Moses, "Rise up early in the morning,
        and stand before Pharaoh; behold, he comes forth to the water;
        and tell him, 'This is what Yahweh says, "Let my people go,
        that they may serve me.
008:021 Else, if you will not let my people go, behold, I will send swarms
        of flies on you, and on your servants, and on your people,
        and into your houses:  and the houses of the Egyptians shall be
        full of swarms of flies, and also the ground whereon they are.
008:022 I will set apart in that day the land of Goshen, in which
        my people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there;
        to the end you may know that I am Yahweh in the midst
        of the earth.
008:023 I will put a division between my people and your people:
        by tomorrow shall this sign be."'"
008:024 Yahweh did so; and there came grievous swarms of flies
        into the house of Pharaoh, and into his servants' houses:
        and in all the land of Egypt the land was corrupted by reason
        of the swarms of flies.
008:025 Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron, and said, "Go, sacrifice to
        your God in the land!"
008:026 Moses said, "It isn't appropriate to do so; for we shall
        sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to Yahweh our God.
        Behold, shall we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians
        before their eyes, and won't they stone us?
008:027 We will go three days' journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice
        to Yahweh our God, as he shall command us."
008:028 Pharaoh said, "I will let you go, that you may sacrifice to Yahweh
        your God in the wilderness, only you shall not go very far away.
        Pray for me."
008:029 Moses said, "Behold, I go out from you, and I will pray
        to Yahweh that the swarms of flies may depart from Pharaoh,
        from his servants, and from his people, tomorrow; only don't
        let Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more in not letting the people
        go to sacrifice to Yahweh."
008:030 Moses went out from Pharaoh, and prayed to Yahweh.
008:031 Yahweh did according to the word of Moses, and he removed the swarms
        of flies from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people.
        There remained not one.
008:032 Pharaoh hardened his heart this time also, and he didn't let
        the people go.
009:001 Then Yahweh said to Moses, "Go in to Pharaoh, and tell him,
        'This is what Yahweh, the God of the Hebrews, says:
        "Let my people go, that they may serve me.
009:002 For if you refuse to let them go, and hold them still,
009:003 behold, the hand of Yahweh is on your livestock which are
        in the field, on the horses, on the donkeys, on the camels,
        on the herds, and on the flocks with a very grievous pestilence.
009:004 Yahweh will make a distinction between the livestock of Israel
        and the livestock of Egypt; and there shall nothing die
        of all that belongs to the children of Israel."'"
009:005 Yahweh appointed a set time, saying, "Tomorrow Yahweh shall
        do this thing in the land."
009:006 Yahweh did that thing on the next day; and all the livestock
        of Egypt died, but of the livestock of the children of Israel,
        not one died.
009:007 Pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not so much as one of
        the livestock of the Israelites dead.  But the heart of Pharaoh
        was stubborn, and he didn't let the people go.
009:008 Yahweh said to Moses and to Aaron, "Take to you handfuls
        of ashes of the furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it toward
        the sky in the sight of Pharaoh.
009:009 It shall become small dust over all the land of Egypt, and shall
        be a boil breaking forth with boils on man and on animal,
        throughout all the land of Egypt."
009:010 They took ashes of the furnace, and stood before Pharaoh;
        and Moses sprinkled it up toward the sky; and it became a boil
        breaking forth with boils on man and on animal.
009:011 The magicians couldn't stand before Moses because of the boils;
        for the boils were on the magicians, and on all the Egyptians.
009:012 Yahweh hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he didn't listen
        to them, as Yahweh had spoken to Moses.
009:013 Yahweh said to Moses, "Rise up early in the morning,
        and stand before Pharaoh, and tell him, 'This is what Yahweh,
        the God of the Hebrews, says:  "Let my people go, that they
        may serve me.
009:014 For this time I will send all my plagues against your heart,
        against your officials, and against your people; that you
        may know that there is none like me in all the earth.
009:015 For now I would have put forth my hand, and struck you and
        your people with pestilence, and you would have been cut off
        from the earth;
009:016 but indeed for this cause I have made you stand:
        to show you my power, and that my name may be declared
        throughout all the earth;
009:017 as you still exalt yourself against my people, that you won't
        let them go.
009:018 Behold, tomorrow about this time I will cause it to rain a very
        grievous hail, such as has not been in Egypt since the day
        it was founded even until now.
009:019 Now therefore command that all of your livestock and all
        that you have in the field be brought into shelter.
        Every man and animal that is found in the field,
        and isn't brought home, the hail shall come down on them,
        and they shall die."'"
009:020 Those who feared the word of Yahweh among the servants of Pharaoh
        made their servants and their livestock flee into the houses.
009:021 Whoever didn't regard the word of Yahweh left his servants
        and his livestock in the field.
009:022 Yahweh said to Moses, "Stretch forth your hand toward the sky,
        that there may be hail in all the land of Egypt, on man,
        and on animal, and on every herb of the field, throughout the
        land of Egypt."
009:023 Moses stretched forth his rod toward the heavens, and Yahweh
        sent thunder, hail, and lightning flashed down to the earth.
        Yahweh rained hail on the land of Egypt.
009:024 So there was very severe hail, and lightning mixed with the hail,
        such as had not been in all the land of Egypt since it
        became a nation.
009:025 The hail struck throughout all the land of Egypt all that was
        in the field, both man and animal; and the hail struck every
        herb of the field, and broke every tree of the field.
009:026 Only in the land of Goshen, where the children of Israel were,
        there was no hail.
009:027 Pharaoh sent, and called for Moses and Aaron, and said to them,
        "I have sinned this time.  Yahweh is righteous, and I and my
        people are wicked.
009:028 Pray to Yahweh; for there has been enough of mighty thunderings
        and hail.  I will let you go, and you shall stay no longer."
009:029 Moses said to him, "As soon as I have gone out of the city,
        I will spread abroad my hands to Yahweh.  The thunders
        shall cease, neither shall there be any more hail; that you
        may know that the earth is Yahweh's.
009:030 But as for you and your servants, I know that you don't yet
        fear Yahweh God."
009:031 The flax and the barley were struck, for the barley was in the ear,
        and the flax was in bloom.
009:032 But the wheat and the spelt were not struck, for they had
        not grown up.
009:033 Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh, and spread abroad
        his hands to Yahweh; and the thunders and hail ceased,
        and the rain was not poured on the earth.
009:034 When Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders
        were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart,
        he and his servants.
009:035 The heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he didn't let the children
        of Israel go, just as Yahweh had spoken through Moses.
010:001 Yahweh said to Moses, "Go in to Pharaoh, for I have hardened
        his heart, and the heart of his servants, that I may show
        these my signs in the midst of them,
010:002 and that you may tell in the hearing of your son,
        and of your son's son, what things I have done to Egypt,
        and my signs which I have done among them; that you may know
        that I am Yahweh."
010:003 Moses and Aaron went in to Pharaoh, and said to him,
        "This is what Yahweh, the God of the Hebrews, says:
        'How long will you refuse to humble yourself before me?
        Let my people go, that they may serve me.
010:004 Or else, if you refuse to let my people go, behold, tomorrow I
        will bring locusts into your country,
010:005 and they shall cover the surface of the earth, so that one
        won't be able to see the earth.  They shall eat the residue
        of that which has escaped, which remains to you from the hail,
        and shall eat every tree which grows for you out of the field.
010:006 Your houses shall be filled, and the houses of all
        your servants, and the houses of all the Egyptians;
        as neither your fathers nor your fathers' fathers have seen,
        since the day that they were on the earth to this day.'"
        He turned, and went out from Pharaoh.
010:007 Pharaoh's servants said to him, "How long will this man be a snare
        to us?  Let the men go, that they may serve Yahweh, their God.
        Don't you yet know that Egypt is destroyed?"
010:008 Moses and Aaron were brought again to Pharaoh, and he said
        to them, "Go, serve Yahweh your God; but who are those
        who will go?"
010:009 Moses said, "We will go with our young and with our old;
        with our sons and with our daughters, with our flocks and with
        our herds will we go; for we must hold a feast to Yahweh."
010:010 He said to them, "Yahweh be with you if I will let you go
        with your little ones!  See, evil is clearly before your faces.
010:011 Not so!  Go now you who are men, and serve Yahweh; for that is
        what you desire!"  They were driven out from Pharaoh's presence.
010:012 Yahweh said to Moses, "Stretch out your hand over the land
        of Egypt for the locusts, that they may come up on the land
        of Egypt, and eat every herb of the land, even all that
        the hail has left."
010:013 Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt,
        and Yahweh brought an east wind on the land all that day,
        and all the night; and when it was morning, the east wind
        brought the locusts.
010:014 The locusts went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested
        in all the borders of Egypt.  They were very grievous.
        Before them there were no such locusts as they, neither after
        them shall be such.
010:015 For they covered the surface of the whole earth, so that
        the land was darkened, and they ate every herb of the land,
        and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left.
        There remained nothing green, either tree or herb of the field,
        through all the land of Egypt.
010:016 Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in haste, and he said,
        "I have sinned against Yahweh your God, and against you.
010:017 Now therefore please forgive my sin again, and pray to Yahweh
        your God, that he may also take away from me this death."
010:018 He went out from Pharaoh, and prayed to Yahweh.
010:019 Yahweh turned an exceeding strong west wind, which took up
        the locusts, and drove them into the Red Sea{or, Sea of Reeds}.
        There remained not one locust in all the borders of Egypt.
010:020 But Yahweh hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he didn't let
        the children of Israel go.
010:021 Yahweh said to Moses, "Stretch out your hand toward the sky,
        that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, even darkness
        which may be felt."
010:022 Moses stretched forth his hand toward the sky, and there was
        a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days.
010:023 They didn't see one another, neither did anyone rise from his
        place for three days; but all the children of Israel had light
        in their dwellings.
010:024 Pharaoh called to Moses, and said, "Go, serve Yahweh.
        Only let your flocks and your herds stay behind.
        Let your little ones also go with you."
010:025 Moses said, "You must also give into our hand sacrifices
        and burnt offerings, that we may sacrifice to Yahweh our God.
010:026 Our livestock also shall go with us.  There shall not a hoof
        be left behind, for of it we must take to serve Yahweh
        our God; and we don't know with what we must serve Yahweh,
        until we come there."
010:027 But Yahweh hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he wouldn't let them go.
010:028 Pharaoh said to him, "Get away from me!  Be careful to see my
        face no more; for in the day you see my face you shall die!"
010:029 Moses said, "You have spoken well.  I will see your face
        again no more."
011:001 Yahweh said to Moses, "Yet one plague more will I bring
        on Pharaoh, and on Egypt; afterwards he will let you go.
        When he lets you go, he will surely thrust you out altogether.
011:002 Speak now in the ears of the people, and let them ask every
        man of his neighbor, and every woman of her neighbor,
        jewels of silver, and jewels of gold."
011:003 Yahweh gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians.
        Moreover the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt,
        in the sight of Pharaoh's servants, and in the sight
        of the people.
011:004 Moses said, "This is what Yahweh says:  'About midnight I
        will go out into the midst of Egypt,
011:005 and all the firstborn in the land of Egypt shall die,
        from the firstborn of Pharaoh who sits on his throne, even to
        the firstborn of the female servant who is behind the mill;
        and all the firstborn of livestock.
011:006 There shall be a great cry throughout all the land of Egypt,
        such as there has not been, nor shall be any more.
011:007 But against any of the children of Israel a dog won't
        even bark or move its tongue, against man or animal;
        that you may know that Yahweh makes a distinction between
        the Egyptians and Israel.
011:008 All these your servants shall come down to me, and bow down
        themselves to me, saying, "Get out, with all the people
        who follow you;" and after that I will go out.'"
        He went out from Pharaoh in hot anger.
011:009 Yahweh said to Moses, "Pharaoh won't listen to you, that my
        wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt."
011:010 Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh, and Yahweh
        hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he didn't let the children
        of Israel go out of his land.
012:001 Yahweh spoke to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, saying,
012:002 "This month shall be to you the beginning of months.
        It shall be the first month of the year to you.
012:003 Speak to all the congregation of Israel, saying, 'On the tenth
        day of this month, they shall take to them every man a lamb,
        according to their fathers' houses, a lamb for a household;
012:004 and if the household be too little for a lamb, then he and
        his neighbor next to his house shall take one according
        to the number of the souls; according to what everyone can
        eat you shall make your count for the lamb.
012:005 Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male a year old.
        You shall take it from the sheep, or from the goats:
012:006 and you shall keep it until the fourteenth day of the same month;
        and the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall
        kill it at evening.
012:007 They shall take some of the blood, and put it on the two doorposts
        and on the lintel, on the houses in which they shall eat it.
012:008 They shall eat the flesh in that night, roasted with fire,
        and unleavened bread.  They shall eat it with bitter herbs.
012:009 Don't eat it raw, nor boiled at all with water, but roasted
        with fire; with its head, its legs and its inner parts.
012:010 You shall let nothing of it remain until the morning;
        but that which remains of it until the morning you shall
        burn with fire.
012:011 This is how you shall eat it:  with your waist girded,
        your shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand;
        and you shall eat it in haste:  it is Yahweh's Passover.
012:012 For I will go through the land of Egypt in that night, and will strike
        all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and animal.
        Against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgments:
        I am Yahweh.
012:013 The blood shall be to you for a token on the houses where you are:
        and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and there
        shall no plague be on you to destroy you, when I strike
        the land of Egypt.
012:014 This day shall be to you for a memorial, and you shall keep
        it a feast to Yahweh:  throughout your generations you shall
        keep it a feast by an ordinance forever.
012:015 "'Seven days shall you eat unleavened bread; even the first
        day you shall put away yeast out of your houses, for whoever
        eats leavened bread from the first day until the seventh day,
        that soul shall be cut off from Israel.
012:016 In the first day there shall be to you a holy convocation,
        and in the seventh day a holy convocation; no manner of work
        shall be done in them, except that which every man must eat,
        that only may be done by you.
012:017 You shall observe the feast of unleavened bread; for in this
        same day have I brought your armies out of the land of Egypt:
        therefore shall you observe this day throughout your generations
        by an ordinance forever.
012:018 In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at evening,
        you shall eat unleavened bread, until the twenty first day
        of the month at evening.
012:019 Seven days shall there be no yeast found in your houses,
        for whoever eats that which is leavened, that soul shall be cut
        off from the congregation of Israel, whether he be a foreigner,
        or one who is born in the land.
012:020 You shall eat nothing leavened.  In all your habitations you
        shall eat unleavened bread.'"
012:021 Then Moses called for all the elders of Israel, and said to them,
        "Draw out, and take lambs according to your families,
        and kill the Passover.
012:022 You shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood that
        is in the basin, and strike the lintel and the two doorposts
        with the blood that is in the basin; and none of you shall
        go out of the door of his house until the morning.
012:023 For Yahweh will pass through to strike the Egyptians; and when
        he sees the blood on the lintel, and on the two doorposts,
        Yahweh will pass over the door, and will not allow the destroyer
        to come in to your houses to strike you.
012:024 You shall observe this thing for an ordinance to you and to
        your sons forever.
012:025 It shall happen when you have come to the land which Yahweh
        will give you, according as he has promised, that you shall
        keep this service.
012:026 It will happen, when your children ask you, 'What do you mean
        by this service?'
012:027 that you shall say, 'It is the sacrifice of Yahweh's Passover,
        who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt,
        when he struck the Egyptians, and spared our houses.'"
        The people bowed their heads and worshiped.
012:028 The children of Israel went and did so; as Yahweh had commanded
        Moses and Aaron, so they did.
012:029 It happened at midnight, that Yahweh struck all the firstborn
        in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh who sat on his
        throne to the firstborn of the captive who was in the dungeon;
        and all the firstborn of livestock.
012:030 Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants,
        and all the Egyptians; and there was a great cry in Egypt,
        for there was not a house where there was not one dead.
012:031 He called for Moses and Aaron by night, and said, "Rise up,
        get out from among my people, both you and the children of Israel;
        and go, serve Yahweh, as you have said!
012:032 Take both your flocks and your herds, as you have said,
        and be gone; and bless me also!"
012:033 The Egyptians were urgent with the people, to send them out
        of the land in haste, for they said, "We are all dead men."
012:034 The people took their dough before it was leavened, their kneading
        troughs being bound up in their clothes on their shoulders.
012:035 The children of Israel did according to the word of Moses;
        and they asked of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels
        of gold, and clothing.
012:036 Yahweh gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians,
        so that they let them have what they asked.
        They despoiled the Egyptians.
012:037 The children of Israel traveled from Rameses to Succoth,
        about six hundred thousand on foot who were men, besides children.
012:038 A mixed multitude went up also with them, with flocks, herds,
        and even very much livestock.
012:039 They baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought
        forth out of Egypt; for it wasn't leavened, because they
        were thrust out of Egypt, and couldn't wait, neither had they
        prepared for themselves any food.
012:040 Now the time that the children of Israel lived in Egypt was
        four hundred thirty years.
012:041 It happened at the end of four hundred thirty years,
        even the same day it happened, that all the armies of Yahweh
        went out from the land of Egypt.
012:042 It is a night to be much observed to Yahweh for bringing them
        out from the land of Egypt.  This is that night of Yahweh,
        to be much observed of all the children of Israel
        throughout their generations.
012:043 Yahweh said to Moses and Aaron, "This is the ordinance
        of the Passover.  There shall no foreigner eat of it,
012:044 but every man's servant who is bought for money, when you
        have circumcised him, then shall he eat of it.
012:045 A foreigner and a hired servant shall not eat of it.
012:046 In one house shall it be eaten; you shall not carry forth
        anything of the flesh abroad out of the house; neither shall
        you break a bone of it.
012:047 All the congregation of Israel shall keep it.
012:048 When a stranger shall live as a foreigner with you,
        and will keep the Passover to Yahweh, let all his males
        be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it;
        and he shall be as one who is born in the land:
        but no uncircumcised person shall eat of it.
012:049 One law shall be to him who is born at home, and to the stranger
        who lives as a foreigner among you."
012:050 Thus did all the children of Israel.  As Yahweh commanded
        Moses and Aaron, so they did.
012:051 It happened the same day, that Yahweh brought the children
        of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their armies.
013:001 Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,
013:002 "Sanctify to me all of the firstborn, whatever opens the womb
        among the children of Israel, both of man and of animal.
        It is mine."
013:003 Moses said to the people, "Remember this day, in which you
        came out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage; for by
        strength of hand Yahweh brought you out from this place.
        No leavened bread shall be eaten.
013:004 This day you go forth in the month Abib.
013:005 It shall be, when Yahweh shall bring you into the land of
        the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Amorite, and the Hivite,
        and the Jebusite, which he swore to your fathers to give you,
        a land flowing with milk and honey, that you shall keep this
        service in this month.
013:006 Seven days you shall eat unleavened bread, and in the seventh
        day shall be a feast to Yahweh.
013:007 Unleavened bread shall be eaten throughout the seven days;
        and no leavened bread shall be seen with you, neither shall
        there be yeast seen with you, in all your borders.
013:008 You shall tell your son in that day, saying, 'It is because of
        that which Yahweh did for me when I came forth out of Egypt.'
013:009 It shall be for a sign to you on your hand, and for a memorial
        between your eyes, that the law of Yahweh may be in your mouth;
        for with a strong hand Yahweh has brought you out of Egypt.
013:010 You shall therefore keep this ordinance in its season from
        year to year.
013:011 "It shall be, when Yahweh shall bring you into the land
        of the Canaanite, as he swore to you and to your fathers,
        and shall give it you,
013:012 that you shall set apart to Yahweh all that opens the womb,
        and every firstborn which you have that comes from an animal.
        The males shall be Yahweh's.
013:013 Every firstborn of a donkey you shall redeem with a lamb;
        and if you will not redeem it, then you shall break its neck;
        and you shall redeem all the firstborn of man among your sons.
013:014 It shall be, when your son asks you in time to come, saying,
        'What is this?' that you shall tell him, 'By strength of hand
        Yahweh brought us out from Egypt, from the house of bondage;
013:015 and it happened, when Pharaoh would hardly let us go,
        that Yahweh killed all the firstborn in the land of Egypt,
        both the firstborn of man, and the firstborn of animal.
        Therefore I sacrifice to Yahweh all that opens the womb,
        being males; but all the firstborn of my sons I redeem.'
013:016 It shall be for a sign on your hand, and for symbols between
        your eyes:  for by strength of hand Yahweh brought us forth
        out of Egypt."
013:017 It happened, when Pharaoh had let the people go, that God
        didn't lead them by the way of the land of the Philistines,
        although that was near; for God said, "Lest perhaps the people
        change their minds when they see war, and they return to Egypt;"
013:018 but God led the people around by the way of the wilderness
        by the Red Sea{or, Sea of Reeds}; and the children of Israel
        went up armed out of the land of Egypt.
013:019 Moses took the bones of Joseph with him, for he had made
        the children of Israel swear, saying, "God will surely visit you,
        and you shall carry up my bones away from here with you."
013:020 They took their journey from Succoth, and encamped in Etham,
        in the edge of the wilderness.
013:021 Yahweh went before them by day in a pillar of cloud,
        to lead them on their way, and by night in a pillar of fire,
        to give them light, that they might go by day and by night:
013:022 the pillar of cloud by day, and the pillar of fire by night,
        didn't depart from before the people.
014:001 Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,
014:002 "Speak to the children of Israel, that they turn back and encamp
        before Pihahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, before Baal Zephon.
        You shall encamp opposite it by the sea.
014:003 Pharaoh will say of the children of Israel, 'They are entangled
        in the land.  The wilderness has shut them in.'
014:004 I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and he will follow after them;
        and I will get honor over Pharaoh, and over all his armies;
        and the Egyptians shall know that I am Yahweh."
        They did so.
014:005 It was told the king of Egypt that the people had fled;
        and the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was changed
        towards the people, and they said, "What is this we have done,
        that we have let Israel go from serving us?"
014:006 He made ready his chariot, and took his army with him;
014:007 and he took six hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots
        of Egypt, and captains over all of them.
014:008 Yahweh hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt,
        and he pursued after the children of Israel; for the children
        of Israel went out with a high hand.
014:009 The Egyptians pursued after them:  all the horses and chariots
        of Pharaoh, his horsemen, and his army; and overtook them
        encamping by the sea, beside Pihahiroth, before Baal Zephon.
014:010 When Pharaoh drew near, the children of Israel lifted up
        their eyes, and behold, the Egyptians were marching after them;
        and they were very afraid.  The children of Israel cried
        out to Yahweh.
014:011 They said to Moses, "Because there were no graves in Egypt,
        have you taken us away to die in the wilderness?
        Why have you treated us this way, to bring us forth out of Egypt?
014:012 Isn't this the word that we spoke to you in Egypt, saying,
        'Leave us alone, that we may serve the Egyptians?'  For it
        were better for us to serve the Egyptians, than that we
        should die in the wilderness."
014:013 Moses said to the people, "Don't be afraid.  Stand still, and see
        the salvation of Yahweh, which he will work for you today:
        for the Egyptians whom you have seen today, you shall never
        see them again.
014:014 Yahweh will fight for you, and you shall be still."
014:015 Yahweh said to Moses, "Why do you cry to me?  Speak to the children
        of Israel, that they go forward.
014:016 Lift up your rod, and stretch out your hand over the sea,
        and divide it:  and the children of Israel shall go into
        the midst of the sea on dry ground.
014:017 I, behold, I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians,
        and they shall go in after them:  and I will get myself honor
        over Pharaoh, and over all his armies, over his chariots,
        and over his horsemen.
014:018 The Egyptians shall know that I am Yahweh, when I have
        gotten myself honor over Pharaoh, over his chariots,
        and over his horsemen."
014:019 The angel of God, who went before the camp of Israel,
        moved and went behind them; and the pillar of cloud moved
        from before them, and stood behind them.
014:020 It came between the camp of Egypt and the camp of Israel; and there
        was the cloud and the darkness, yet gave it light by night:
        and the one didn't come near the other all the night.
014:021 Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and Yahweh caused
        the sea to go back by a strong east wind all the night,
        and made the sea dry land, and the waters were divided.
014:022 The children of Israel went into the midst of the sea on
        the dry ground, and the waters were a wall to them on their
        right hand, and on their left.
014:023 The Egyptians pursued, and went in after them into the midst
        of the sea:  all of Pharaoh's horses, his chariots,
        and his horsemen.
014:024 It happened in the morning watch, that Yahweh looked out on
        the Egyptian army through the pillar of fire and of cloud,
        and confused the Egyptian army.
014:025 He took off their chariot wheels, and they drove them heavily;
        so that the Egyptians said, "Let's flee from the face of Israel,
        for Yahweh fights for them against the Egyptians!"
014:026 Yahweh said to Moses, "Stretch out your hand over the sea,
        that the waters may come again on the Egyptians, on their chariots,
        and on their horsemen."
014:027 Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and the sea returned
        to its strength when the morning appeared; and the Egyptians
        fled against it.  Yahweh overthrew the Egyptians in the midst
        of the sea.
014:028 The waters returned, and covered the chariots and the horsemen,
        even all Pharaoh's army that went in after them into the sea.
        There remained not so much as one of them.
014:029 But the children of Israel walked on dry land in the midst of
        the sea, and the waters were a wall to them on their right hand,
        and on their left.
014:030 Thus Yahweh saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians;
        and Israel saw the Egyptians dead on the seashore.
014:031 Israel saw the great work which Yahweh did to the Egyptians,
        and the people feared Yahweh; and they believed in Yahweh,
        and in his servant Moses.
015:001 Then Moses and the children of Israel sang this song to Yahweh,
        and said, "I will sing to Yahweh, for he has triumphed gloriously.
        The horse and his rider he has thrown into the sea.
015:002 Yah is my strength and song.  He has become my salvation.
        This is my God, and I will praise him; my father's God,
        and I will exalt him.
015:003 Yahweh is a man of war.  Yahweh is his name.
015:004 He has cast Pharaoh's chariots and his army into the sea.
        His chosen captains are sunk in the Red Sea{or, Sea of Reeds}.
015:005 The deeps cover them.  They went down into the depths
        like a stone.
015:006 Your right hand, Yahweh, is glorious in power.
        Your right hand, Yahweh, dashes the enemy in pieces.
015:007 In the greatness of your excellency, you overthrow those
        who rise up against you.  You send forth your wrath.
        It consumes them as stubble.
015:008 With the blast of your nostrils, the waters were piled up.
        The floods stood upright as a heap.  The deeps were congealed
        in the heart of the sea.
015:009 The enemy said, 'I will pursue.  I will overtake.
        I will divide the spoil.  My desire shall be satisfied on them.
        I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.'
015:010 You blew with your wind.  The sea covered them.
        They sank like lead in the mighty waters.
015:011 Who is like you, Yahweh, among the gods?  Who is like you,
        glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?
015:012 You stretched out your right hand.  The earth swallowed them.
015:013 "You, in your loving kindness, have led the people that you
        have redeemed.  You have guided them in your strength
        to your holy habitation.
015:014 The peoples have heard.  They tremble.  Pangs have taken hold
        on the inhabitants of Philistia.
015:015 Then the chiefs of Edom were dismayed.  Trembling takes hold
        of the mighty men of Moab.  All the inhabitants of Canaan
        are melted away.
015:016 Terror and dread falls on them.  By the greatness of your arm
        they are as still as a stone--until your people pass over,
        Yahweh, until the people pass over who you have purchased.
015:017 You shall bring them in, and plant them in the mountain
        of your inheritance, the place, Yahweh, which you have made
        for yourself to dwell in; the sanctuary, Lord, which your
        hands have established.
015:018 Yahweh shall reign forever and ever."
015:019 For the horses of Pharaoh went in with his chariots and with
        his horsemen into the sea, and Yahweh brought back the 
But man, blinded by his prejudices; rendered obstinate in injuring his
fellow, by his enthusiasm; ranges himself in hostility even against
those who are sincerely desirous of procuring for him the most
substantive benefits. Accustomed to be deceived, he is in a state of
continual suspicion; habituated to mistrust himself, to view his reason
with diffidence, to look upon truth as dangerous, he treats as enemies
even those who most eagerly strive to encourage him; forewarned in early
life against delusion, by the subtilty of imposture, he believes himself
imperatively called upon to guard with the most sedulous activity the
bandeau with which they have hoodwinked him; he thinks his eternal
welfare involved in keeping it for ever over his eyes; he therefore
wrestles with all those who attempt to tear it from his obscured optics.
If his visual organs, accustomed to darkness, are for a moment opened,
the light offends them; he is distressed by its effulgence; he thinks it
criminal to be enlightened; he darts with fury upon those who hold the
flambeau by which he is dazzled. In consequence, the atheist, as the
arch rogue from whom he differs ludicrously calls him, is looked upon as
a malignant pest, as a public poison, which like another Upas, destroys
every thing within the vortex of its influence; he who dares to arouse
mortals from the lethargic habit which the narcotic doses administered
by the theologians have induced passes for a perturbator; he who
attempts to calm their frantic transports, to moderate the fury of
their maniacal paroxysms, is himself viewed as a madman, who ought to
be closely chained down in the dungeons appropriated to lunatics; he
who invites his associates to rend their chains asunder, to break their
galling fetters, appears only like an irrational, inconsiderate being,
even to the wretched captives themselves: who have been taught to
believe that nature formed them for no other purpose than to tremble:
only called them into existence that they might be loaded with shackles.
In consequence of these fatal prepossessions, the _Disciple of Nature_
is generally treated as an assassin; is commonly received by his fellow
citizens in the same manner as the feathered race receive the doleful
bird of night, which as soon as it quits its retreat, all the other
birds follow with a common hatred, uttering a variety of doleful cries.

No, mortals blended by terror! The friend of nature is not your enemy;
its interpreter is not the minister of falsehood; the destroyer of your
vain phantoms is not the devastator of those truths necessary to your
happiness; the disciple of reason is not an irrational being, who either
seeks to poison you, or to infect you with a dangerous delirium. If
he is desirous to wrest the thunder from those terrible theories that
affright ye, it is that ye way discontinue your march, in the midst
of storms, over roads that ye can only distinguish by the sudden, but
evanescent glimmerings of the electric fluid. If he breaks those idols,
which fear has served with myrrh and frankencense--which superstition
has surrounded by gloomy despondency--which fanaticism has imbrued with
blood; it is to substitute in their place those consoling truths that
are calculated to heal the desperate wounds ye have received; that are
suitable to inspire you with courage, sturdily to oppose yourselves
to such dangerous errors; that have power to enable you to resist such
formidable enemies. If he throws down the temples, overturns the altars,
so frequently bathed with the bitter tears of the unfortunate, blackened
by the most cruel sacrifices, smoked with servile incense, it is that he
may erect a fane sacred to peace; a hall dedicated to reason; a durable
monument to virtue, in which ye may at all times find an asylum against
your own phrenzy; a refuge from your own ungovernable passions; a
sanctuary against those powerful dogmatists, by whom ye are oppressed.
If he attacks the haughty pretensions of deified tyrants, who crush ye
with an iron sceptre, it is that ye may enjoy the rights of your nature;
it is to the end that ye may be substantively freemen, in mind as well
as in body; that ye may not be slaves, eternally chained to the oar of
misery; it is that ye may at length be governed by men who are citizens,
who may cherish their own semblances, who way protect mortals like
themselves, who may actually consult the interests of those from
whom they hold their power. If he battles with imposture, it is to
re-establish truth in those rights which have been so long usurped by
fiction. If he undermines the base of that unsteady, fanatical morality,
which has hitherto done nothing more than perplex your minds, without
correcting your hearts; it is to give to ethics an immovable basis, a
solid foundation, secured upon your own nature; upon the reciprocity of
those wants which are continually regenerating in sensible beings: dare,
then, to listen to his voice; you will find it much more intelligible
than those ambiguous oracles, which are announced to you as the
offspring of capricious theories; as imperious decrees that are
unceasingly at variance with themselves. Listen then to nature, she
never contradicts her own eternal laws.

"O thou!" cries this nature to man, "who, following the impulse I
have given you, during your whole existence, incessantly tend towards
happiness, do not strive to resist my sovereign law. Labour to your own
felicity; partake without fear of the banquet which is spread before
you, with the most hearty welcome; you will find the means legibly
written on your own heart. Vainly dost thou, O superstitious being! seek
after thine happiness beyond the limits of the universe, in which my
hand hath placed thee: vainly shalt thou search it in those inexorable
theories, which thine imagination, ever prone to wander, would establish
upon my eternal throne: vainly dost thou expect it in those fanciful
regions, to which thine own delirium hath given a locality and a shame:
vainly dost thou reckon upon capricious systems, with whose advantages
thou art in such ecstasies; whilst they only fill thine abode with
calamity--thine heart with dread--thy mind with illusions--thy bosom
with groans. Know that when thou neglectest my counsels, the gods will
refuse their aid. Dare, then, to affranchise thyself from the trammels
of superstition, my self-conceited, pragmatic rival, who mistakes
my rights; renounce those empty theories, which are usurpers of my
privileges; return under the dominion of my laws, which, however severe,
are mild in comparison with those of bigotry. It is in my empire
alone that true liberty reigns. Tyranny is unknown to its soil; equity
unceasingly watches over the rights of all my subjects, maintains
them in the possession of their just claims; benevolence, grafted upon
humanity, connects them by amicable bonds; truth enlightens them; never
can imposture blind them with his obscuring mists. Return, then,
my child, to thy fostering mother's arms! Deserter, trace back thy
wandering steps to nature! She will console thee for thine evils; she
will drive from thine heart those appalling fears which overwhelm thee;
those inquietudes that distract thee; those transports which agitate
thee; those hatreds that separate thee from thy fellow man, whom thou
shouldst love as thyself. Return to nature, to humanity, to thyself!
Strew flowers over the road of life: cease to contemplate the future;
live to thine own happiness; exist for thy fellow creatures; retire into
thyself, examine thine own heart, then consider the sensitive beings by
whom thou art surrounded: leave to their inventors those systems which
can effect nothing towards thy felicity. Enjoy thyself, and cause others
also to enjoy, those comforts which I have placed with a liberal hand,
for all the children of the earth; who all equally emanate from my
bosom: assist them to support the sorrows to which necessity has
submitted them in common with thyself. Know, that I approve thy
pleasures, when without injuring thyself, they are not fatal to thy
brethren, whom I have rendered indispensably necessary to thine own
individual happiness. These pleasures are freely permitted thee, if thou
indulgest them with moderation; with that discretion which I myself have
fixed. Be happy, then, O man! Nature invites thee to participate in it;
but always remember, thou canst not be so alone; because I invite all
mortals to happiness as well as thyself; thou will find it is only in
securing their felicity that thou canst consolidate thine own. Such is
the decree of thy destiny: if thou shalt attempt to withdraw thyself
from its operation, recollect that hatred will pursue thee; vengeance
overtake thy steps; and remorse be ever ready at hand to punish the
infractions of its irrevocable mandates.

"Follow then, O man! in whatever station thou findest thyself, the
routine I have described for thee, to obtain that happiness to which
thou hast an indispensable right to challenge pretension. Let the
sensations of humanity interest thee for the condition of other men, who
are thy fellow creatures; let thine heart have commisseration for their
misfortunes: let thy generous hand spontaneously stretch forth to lend
succour to the unhappy mortal who is overwhelmed by his destiny; always
bearing in thy recollection, that it may fall heavy upon thyself, as
it now does upon him. Acknowledge, then, without guile, that every
unfortunate has an inalienable right to thy kindness. Above all, wipe
from the eyes of oppressed innocence the trickling crystals of agonized
feeling; let the tears of virtue in distress, fall upon thy sympathizing
bosom; let the genial glow of sincere friendship animate thine honest
heart; let the fond attachment of a mate, cherished by thy warmest
affection, make thee forget the sorrows of life: be faithful to her
love, responsible to her tenderness, that she may reward thee by
a reciprocity of feeling; that under the eyes of parents united in
virtuous esteem, thy offspring may learn to set a proper value on
practical virtue; that after having occupied thy riper years, they may
comfort thy declining age, gild with content thy setting sun, cheer the
evening of thine existence, by a dutiful return of that care which thou
shalt have bestowed on their imbecile infancy.

"Be just, because equity is the support of human society! Be good,
because goodness connects all hearts in adamantine bonds! Be indulgent,
because feeble thyself, thou livest with beings who partake of thy
weakness! Be gentle, because mildness attracts attention! Be thankful,
because gratitude feeds benevolence, nourishes generosity! Be modest,
because haughtiness is disgusting to beings at all times well with
themselves. Forgive injuries, because revenge perpetuates hatred! Do
good to him who injureth thee, in order to shew thyself more noble than
he is; to make a friend of him, who was once thine enemy! Be reserved
in thy demeanor, temperate in thine enjoyment, chaste in thy pleasures,
because voluptuousness begets weariness, intemperance engenders disease;
forward manners are revolting: excess at all times relaxes the springs
of thy machine, will ultimately destroy thy being, and render thee
hateful to thyself, contemptible to others.

"Be a faithful citizen; because the community is necessary to thine own
security; to the enjoyment of thine own existence; to the furtherance
of thine own happiness. Be loyal, but be brave; submit to legitimate
authority; because it is requisite to the maintenance of that society
which is necessary to thyself. Be obedient to the laws; because they
_are_, or _ought to be_, the expression of the public will, to which
thine own particular will ought ever to be subordinate. Defend thy
country with zeal; because it is that which renders thee happy, which
contains thy property, as well as those beings dearest to thine heart:
do not permit this common parent of thyself, as well as of thy fellow
citizens, to fall under the shackles of tyranny; because from thence
it will be no more than thy common prison. If thy country, deaf to the
equity of thy claims, refuses thee happiness--if, submitted to an unjust
power, it suffers thee to be oppressed, withdraw thyself from its bosom
in silence, but never disturb its peace.

"In short, be a man; be a sensible, rational being; be a faithful
husband; a tender father; an equitable master; a zealous citizen; labour
to serve thy country by thy prowess; by thy talents; by thine industry;
above all, by thy virtues. Participate with thine associates those gifts
which nature has bestowed upon thee; diffuse happiness, among thy fellow
mortals; inspire thy fellow citizens with content; spread joy over all
those who approach thee, that the sphere of thine actions, enlivened by
thy kindness, illumined by thy benevolence, may re-act upon thyself; be
assured that the man who makes others happy cannot himself be miserable.
In thus conducting thyself, whatever may be the injustice of others,
whatever may be the blindness of those beings with whom it is thy
destiny to live, thou wilt never be totally bereft of the recompense
which is thy due; no power on earth be able to ravish from thee that
never failing source of the purest felicity, inward content; at each
moment thou wilt fall back with pleasure upon thyself; thou wilt neither
feel the rankling of shame, the terror of internal alarm, nor find
thy heart corroded by remorse. Thou wilt esteem thyself; thou wilt be
cherished by the virtuous, applauded and loved by all good men, whose
suffrages are much more valuable than those of the bewildered
multitude. Nevertheless, if externals occupy thy contemplation, smiling
countenances will greet thy presence; happy faces will express the
interest they have in thy welfare; jocund beings will make thee
participate in their placid feelings. A life so spent, will each moment
be marked by the serenity of thine own soul, by the affection of the
beings who environ thee; will be made cheerful by the friendship of thy
fellows; will enable thee to rise a contented, satisfied guest from the
general feast; conduct thee gently down the declivity of life, lead thee
peaceably to the period of thy days; for die thou must: but already
thou wilt survive thyself in thought; thou wilt always live in the
remembrance of thy friends; in the grateful recollection of those beings
whose comforts have been augmented by thy friendly attentions; thy
virtues will, beforehand have erected to thy fame an imperishable
monument: if heaven occupies itself with thee, it will feel satisfied
with thy conduct, when it shall thus have contented the earth.

"Beware, then, how thou complainest of thy condition; be just, be kind,
be virtuous, and thou canst never be wholly destitute of felicity. Take
heed how thou enviest the transient pleasure of seductive crime; the
deceitful power of victorious tyranny; the specious tranquillity of
interested imposture; the plausible manners of venal justice; the shewy,
ostentatious parade of hardened opulence. Never be tempted to increase
the number of sycophants to an ambitious despot; to swell the catalogue
of slaves to an unjust tyrant; never suffer thyself to be allured to
infamy, to the practice of extortion, to the commission of outrage, by
the fatal privilege of oppressing thy fellows; always recollect it will
be at the expence of the most bitter remorse thou wilt acquire this
baneful advantage. Never be the mercenary accomplice of the spoilers of
thy country; they are obliged to blush secretly whenever they meet the
public eye.

"For, do not deceive thyself, it is I who punish, with an unerring hand,
all the crimes of the earth; the wicked may escape the laws of man, but
they never escape mine. It is I who have formed the hearts, as well
an the bodies of mortals; it is I who have fixed the laws which govern
them. If thou deliverest thyself up to voluptuous enjoyment, the
companions of thy debaucheries may applaud thee; but I shall punish thee
with the most cruel infirmities; these will terminate a life of shame
with deserved contempt. If thou givest, thyself up to intemperate
indulgences, human laws may not correct thee, but I shall castigate thee
severely by abridging thy days. If thou art vicious, thy fatal habits
will recoil on thine own head. Princes, those terrestrial divinities,
whose power places them above the laws of mankind, are nevertheless
obliged to tremble under the silent operation of my decrees. It is I who
chastise them; it is I who fill their breasts with suspicion; it is
I who inspire them with terror; it is I who make them writhe under
inquietude; it is I who make them shudder with horror, at the very name
of august truth; it is I who, amidst the crowd of nobles who surround
them, make them feel the inward workings of shame; the keen anguish of
guilt; the poisoned arrows of regret; the cruel stings of remorse; it is
I who, when they abuse my bounty, diffuse weariness over their benumbed
souls; it is I who follow uncreated, eternal justice; it is I who,
without distinction of persons, know how to make the balance even; to
adjust the chastisement to the fault; to make the misery bear its due
proportion to the depravity; to inflict punishment commensurate with the
crime. The laws of man are just, only when they are in conformity with
mine; his judgements are rational, only when I have dictated them: my
laws alone are immutable, universal, irrefragable; formed to regulate
the condition of the human race, in all ages, in all places, under all
circumstances.

"If thou doubtest mine authority, if thou questionest the irresistible
power I possess over mortals, contemplate the vengeance I wreak on all
those who resist my decrees. Dive into the recesses of the hearts of
those various criminals, whose countenances, assuming a forced smile,
cover souls torn with anguish. Dost thou not behold ambition tormented
day and night, with an ardour which nothing can extinguish? Dost not
thou see the mighty conquerer become the lord of devastated solitudes;
his victorious career, marked by a blasted cultivation, reign
sorrowfully over smoking ruins; govern unhappy wretches who curse him in
their hearts; while his soul, gnawed by remorse, sickens at the gloomy
aspect of his own triumphs? Dost thou believe that the tyrant, encircled
with his flatterers, who stun him with their praise, is unconscious of
the hatred which his oppression excites; of the contempt which his vices
draw upon him; of the sneers which his inutility call forth; of the
scorn which his debaucheries entail upon his name? Dost thou think that
the haughty courtier does not inwardly blush at the galling insults he
brooks; despise, from the bottom of his soul, those meannesses by
which he is compelled to purchase favours; feel at his heart's core the
wretched dependence in which his cupidity places him.

"Contemplate the indolent child of wealth, behold him a prey to the
lassitude of unmeasured enjoyment, corroded by the satiety which always
follows his exhausted pleasures. View the miser with an emaciated
countenance, the consequence of his own penurious disposition, whose
callous heart is inaccessible to the calls of misery, groaning over the
accumulating load of useless treasure, which at the expense of himself,
he has laboured to amass. Behold the gay voluptuary, the smiling
debauche, secretly lament the health they have so inconsiderately
damaged so prodigally thrown away: see disdain, joined to hatred, reign
between those adulterous married couples, who have reciprocally violated
the sacred vows they mutually pledged at the altar of Hymen; whose
appetencies have rendered them the scorn of the world; the jest of their
acquaintance; polluted tributaries to the surgeon. See the liar
deprived of all confidence; the knave stript of all trust; the hypocrite
fearfully avoiding the penetrating looks of his inquisitive neighbour;
the impostor trembling at the very name of formidable truth. Bring under
your review the heart of the envious, uselessly dishonored; that withers
at the sight of his neighbour's prosperity. Cast your eyes on the frozen
soul of the ungrateful wretch, whom no kindness can warm, no benevolence
thaw, no beneficence convert into a genial fluid. Survey the iron
feelings of that monster whom the sighs of the unfortunate cannot
mollify. Behold the revengeful being nourished with venemous gall, whose
very thoughts are serpents; who in his rage consumes himself. Envy, if
thou canst, the waking slumbers of the homicide; the startings of the
iniquitous judge; the restlessness of the oppressor of innocence; the
fearful visions of the extortioner; whose couches are infested with the
torches of the furies. Thou tremblest without doubt at the sight of
that distraction which, amidst their splendid luxuries, agitates those
farmers of the revenue, who fatten upon public calamnity--who devour the
substance of the orphan--who consume the means of the widow--who grind
the hard earnings of the poor: thou shudderest at witnessing the remorse
which rends the souls of those reverend criminals, whom the uninformed
believe to be happy, whilst the contempt which they have for themselves,
the unerring shafts of secret upbraidings, are incessantly revenging
an outraged nation. Thou seest, that content is for ever banished the
heart; quiet for ever driven from the habitations of those miserable
wretches on whose minds I have indelibly engraved the scorn, the infamy,
the chastisement which they deserve. But, no! thine eyes cannot sustain
the tragic spectacle of my vengeance. Humanity obliges thee to partake
of their merited sufferings; thou art moved to pity for these unhappy
people, to whom consecrated errors renders vice necessary; whose fatal
habits make them familiar with crime. Yes; thou shunnest them without
hating them; thou wouldst succour them, if their contumacious perversity
had left thee the means. When thou comparest thine own condition, when
thou examinest thine own soul, thou wilt have just cause to felicitate
thyself, if thou shalt find that peace has taken up her abode with thee;
that contentment dwells at the bottom of thine own heart. In short, thou
seest accomplished upon them, as well as, upon thyself, the unalterable
decrees of destiny, which imperiously demand, that crime shall punish
itself, that virtue never shall be destitute Of remuneration."

Such is the sum of those truths which are contained in the _Code of
Nature_; such are the doctrines, which its disciples can announce. They
are unquestionably preferable to that supernatural superstition which
never does any thing but mischief to the human species. Such is the
worship that is taught by that sacred reason, which is the object of
contempt with the theologian; which meets the insult of the fanatic;
who only estimates that which man can neither conceive nor practise; who
make his morality consist in fictitious duties; his virtue in actions
generally useless, frequently pernicious to the welfare of society; who
for want of being acquainted with nature, which is before their eyes,
believe themselves obliged to seek in ideal worlds imaginary motives, of
which every thing proves the inefficacy. The motive which the morality
of nature employs, is the self-evident interest of each individual,
of each community, of the whole human species, in all times, in every
country, under all circumstances. Its worship is the sacrifice of vice,
the practise of real virtues; its object is the conservation of the
human race, the happiness of the individual, the peace of mankind;
its recompences are affection, esteem, and glory; or in their default,
contentment of mind, with merited self-esteem, of which no power will
ever be able to deprive virtuous mortals; its punishments, are hatred,
contempt, and indignation; which society always reserves for those
who outrage its interests; from which even the most powerful can never
effectually shield themselves.

Those nations who shall be disposed to practise a morality so wise, who
shall inculcate it in infancy, whose laws shall unceasingly confirm it,
will neither have occasion for superstition, nor for chimeras. Those
who shall obstinately prefer figments to their dearest interests, will
certainly march forward to ruin. If they maintain themselves for a
season, it is because the power of nature sometimes drives them back to
reason, in despite of those prejudices which appear to lead them on to
certain destruction. Superstition, leagued with tyranny, for the waste
of the human species, are themselves frequently obliged to implore
the assistance of a reason which they contemn; of a nature which they
disdain; which they debase; which they endeavour to crush under the
ponderous bulk of artificial theories. Superstition, in all times so
fatal to mortals, when attacked by reason, assumes the sacred mantle of
public utility; rests its importance on false grounds, founds its
rights upon the indissoluble alliance which it pretends subsists between
morality and itself; notwithstanding it never ceases for a single
instant to wage against it the most cruel hostility. It is,
unquestionably, by this artifice, that it has seduced so many sages.
In the honesty of their hearts, they believe it useful to politics;
necessary to restrain the ungovernable fury of the passions; thus
hypocritical superstition, in order to mask to superficial observers,
its own hideous character, like the ass with the lion's skin, always
knows how to cover itself with the sacred armour of utility; to buckle
on the invulnerable shield of virtue; it has therefore, been believed
imperative to respect it, notwithstanding it felt awkward under these
incumbrances; it consequently has become a duty to favor imposture,
because it has artfully entrenched itself behind the altars of truth;
its ears, however, discover its worthlessness; its natural cowardice
betrays itself; it is from this intrenchment we ought to drive it; it
should be dragged forth to public view; stripped of its surreptitious
panoply; exposed in its native deformity; in order that the human race
may become acquainted with its dissimulation; that mankind may have a
knowledge of its crimes; that the universe may behold its sacrilegious
hands, armed with homicidal poniards, stained with the blood of nations,
whom it either intoxicates with its fury, or immolates without pity to
the violence of its passions.

The MORALITY OF NATURE is the only creed which her interpreter offers to
his fellow citizens; to nations; to the human species; to future races,
weaned from those prejudices which have so frequently disturbed the
felicity of their ancestors. The friend of mankind cannot be the friend
of delusion, which at all times has been a real scourge to the earth.
The APOSTLE OF NATURE will not be the instrument of deceitful chimeras,
by which this world is made only an abode of illusions; the adorer of
truth will not compromise with falsehood; he will make no covenant with
error; conscious it must always be fatal to mortals. He knows that the
happiness of the human race imperiously exacts that the dark unsteady
edifice of superstition should be razed to its foundations; in order
to elevate on its ruins a temple suitable to peace--a fane sacred to
virtue. He feels it is only by extirpating, even to the most slender
fibres, the poisonous tree, that during so many ages has overshadowed
the universe, that the inhabitants of this world will be able to use
their own optics--to bear with steadiness that light which is competent
to illumine their understanding--to guide their wayward steps--to give
the necessary ardency to their souls. If his efforts should be vain; if
he cannot inspire with courage, beings too much accustomed to tremble;
he will, at least, applaud himself for having dared the attempt.
Nevertheless, he will not judge his exertions fruitless, if he has
only been enabled to make a single mortal happy: if his principles have
calmed the conflicting transports of one honest soul; if his reasonings
have cheered up some few virtuous hearts. At least he will have the
advantage of having banished from his own mind the importunate terror
of superstition; of having expelled from his own heart the gall which
exasperates zeal; of having trodden under foot those chimeras with which
the uninformed are tormented. Thus, escaped from the peril of the storm,
he will calmly contemplate from the summit of his rock, those tremendous
hurricanes which superstition excites; he will hold forth a succouring
hand to those who shall be willing to accept it; he will encourage them
with his voice; he will second them with his best exertions, and in the
warmth of his own compassionate heart, he will exclaim:

O NATURE; sovereign of all beings! and ye, her adorable daughters,
VIRTUE, REASON, and TRUTH! remain for ever our revered protectors: it is
to you that belong the praises of the human race; to you appertains the
homage of the earth. Shew, us then, O NATURE! that which man ought
to do, in order to obtain the happiness which thou makest him desire.
VIRTUE! Animate him with thy beneficent fire. REASON! Conduct his
uncertain steps through the paths of life. TRUTH! Let thy torch illumine
his intellect, dissipate the darkness of his road. Unite, O assisting
deities! your powers, in order to submit the hearts of mankind to
your dominion. Banish error from our mind; wickedness from our hearts;
confusion from our footsteps; cause knowledge to extend its salubrious
reign; goodness to occupy our souls; serenity to dwell in our bosoms.
Let imposture, confounded, never again dare to shew its head. Let our
eyes, so long, either dazzled or blindfolded, be at length fixed
upon those objects we ought to seek. Dispel for ever those mists
of ignorance, those hideous phantoms, together with those seducing
chimeras, which only serve to lead us astray. Extricate us from that
dark abyss into which we are plunged by superstition; overthrow the
fatal empire of delusion; crumble the throne of falsehood; wrest from
their polluted hands the power they have usurped. Command men, without
sharing your authority with mortals: break the chains that bind them
down in slavery: tear away the bandeau by which they are hoodwinked;
allay the fury that intoxicates them; break in the hands of sanguinary,
lawless tyrants, that iron sceptre with which they are crushed to
exile; the imaginary regions, from whence fear has imported them, those
theories by which they are afflicted. Inspire the intelligent being with
courage; infuse energy into his system, that, at length, he may feel his
own dignity; that he may dare to love himself; to esteem his own actions
when they are worthy; that a slave only to your eternal laws, he may no
longer fear to enfranchise himself from all other trammels; that blest
with freedom, he may have the wisdom to cherish his fellow creature; and
become happy by learning to perfection his own condition; instruct him
in the great lesson, that the high road to felicity, is prudently to
partake himself, and also to cause others to enjoy, the rich banquet
which thou, O Nature! hast so bountifully set before him. Console thy
children for those sorrows to which their destiny submits them, by
those pleasures which wisdom allows them to partake; teach them to be
contented with their condition; to banish envy from their mind; to yield
silently to necessity. Conduct them without alarm to that period which
all beings must find; _let them learn that time changes all things, that
consequently they are made neither to avoid its scythe nor to fear its
arrival._





[TRANSLATOR'S APPENDIX]

A BRIEF SKETCH

OF THE

LIFE AND WRITINGS

OF

M. DE. MIRABAUD.


At a time when we are on the eve of an important change in our
political affairs, which must evidently lead either to the recovery and
re-establishment of our liberties, or to a military despotism, those who
are connected with the press ought to use every exertion to enlighten
their fellow-citizens, and to assert their right of canvassing, in the
most free and unrestrained manner, every subject connected with the
happiness of man.

The priesthood have ever been convenient tools in the hands of
tyrants, to keep the bulk of the people in a degraded servility. By the
superstitious and slavish doctrines which they infuse into their minds,
they prevent them from thinking for themselves and asserting their own
independence. At a moment when national schools are erecting in every
quarter of the country, not with a sincere desire of enlightening the
rising generation, but with the insidious design of instilling into
their minds the doctrines of "Church and King," in order to bolster up
a little longer the present rotten, tottering, and corrupt system: at
a moment, too, when thousands of fanatic preachers are traversing the
country, with a view to subjugate the human mind to the baleful empire
of visonary enthusiasm and sectarian bigotry to the utter extinction
of every noble, manly, liberal, and pilanthropic principle;--at such a
moment as this, we thought that the "SYSTEM OF NATURE" could not fail
to render essential service to the cause both of civil and religious
liberty. No work, ancient or modern, has surpassed it, in the eloquence
and sublimity of its language, or in the facility with which it treats
the most abtruse and difficult subjects. It is, without exception, the
boldest effort the human mind has yet produced, in the investigation
of morals and theology--in the destruction of priestcraft and
superstition--and in developing the sources of all those passions and
prejudices which have proved so fatal to the tranquillity of the world.

The republic of letters has never produced an author whose pen was so
well calculated to emancipate mankind from all those trammels with which
the nurse, the schoolmaster and the priest have successively locked
up their noblest faculties, before they were capable of reasoning and
judging for themselves. The frightful apprehensions of the gloomy
bigot, and all the appalling terrors of superstition, are here utterly
annihilated, to the complete satisfaction of every unbiassed and
impartial person.--These we considered as necessary observations to
make, previous to any attempt at the biography of the author.

Biography may be reckoned among the most interesting of literary
productions. Its intrinsic value is such, that, though capable of
extraordinary embellishment from the hand of genius, yet no inferiority
of execution can so degrade it, as to deprive it of utility. Whatever
relates even to man in general, considered only as an aggregate of
active and intelligent beings, has a strong claim upon our notice; but
that which relates to our author, as distinguished from the rest of his
species, moving in a more exalted sphere, and towering above them by
the resplendent excellencies of his mind, seems to me to be peculiarly
calculated for our contemplation, and ought to form the highest pleasure
of our lives. There is a principle of curiosity implanted in us, which
leads us, in an especial manner, to investigate our fellow creatures;
the eager inquisitiveness with which the mechanic seeks to know the
history of his fellow-workmen and the ardour with which the philosopher,
the poet, or the historian hunts for details that may familiarize
him with, a Descartes or a Newton, with a Milton, a Hume, or a
Gibbon--spring from the same source. Their object, however, may
perhaps vary; for, in the former, it may be for the sake of detraction,
invidious cavil, or malice; in the latter, it is a sweet homage paid by
the human heart to the memory of departed genius.

It has been repeatedly observed that the life of a scholar affords few
materials for biography. This is only negatively true;--could every
scholar have a Boswell, the remark would vanish; or were every scholar
a Rousseau, a Gibbon, or a Cumberland it would be equally nugatory.
What can present higher objects of contemplation--what can claim
more forcibly our attention--where can we seek for subjects of a more
precious nature, than in the elucidation of the operations of mind,
the acquisition of knowledge, the gradual expansion of genius; its
application, its felicities, its sorrows, its wreaths of fame, its cold,
undeserved neglect? Such scenes, painted by, the artist himself, are a
rich bequest to mankind: even when traced by the hand of friendship
or the pencil of admiration, they possess a permanent interest in our
hearts. I cannot conceive a life more worthy of public notice, more
important, more interesting to human nature, than the life of a literary
man, were it executed according to the ideas I have formed of it: did
it exhibit a faithful delineation of the progress of intellect, from the
cradle upwards; did it portray, in accurate colors, the production of
what we call genius: by what accident it was first awakened; what were
its first tendencies; how directed to a particular object; by what means
it was nourished and unfolded; the gradual progress of its operation
in the production of a work; its hopes and fears; its delights; its
miseries; its inspirations; and all the thousand fleeting joys that so
often invest its path but for a moment, and then fade like the dews
of the morning. Let it contain too a transcript of the many nameless
transports that float round the heart, that dance in the gay circle
before the ardent gazing eye, when the first conception of some future
effort strikes the mind; how it pictures undefined delights of fame and
popular applause; how it anticipates the bright moments of invention,
and dwells with prophetic ecstasy on the felicitous execution of
particular parts, that already start into existence by the magic touch
of a heated imagination. Let it depict the tender feelings of solitude,
the breathings of midnight silence, the scenes of mimic life, of imaged
trial, that often occupy the musing mind; let it be such a work, so
drawn, so coloured, and who shall pronounce it inferior? Who rather
will not confess that it presents a picture of human nature, where every
heart may find some corresponding harmony? When, therefore, it is said,
that the life of a scholar is barren, it is so only because it has never
been properly delineated; because those parts only have been selected
which are common, and fail to distinguish him from the common man;
because we have never penetrated into his closet, or into his heart;
because we have drawn him only as an outward figure, and left unnoticed
that internal structure that would delight, astonish, and improve. And
then, when we compare the life of such a man with the more active one
of a soldier, a statesman, or a lawyer, we pronounce it insipid,
uninteresting. True;--the man of study has not fought for hire--he has
not slaughtered at the command of a master: he would disdain to do
so. Though unaccompanied with the glaring actions of public men, which
confound and dazzle by their publicity, but shrink from the estimation
of moral truth, it would present a far nobler picture; yes, and a more
instructive one:--the calm disciple of reason meditates in silence; he
walks his road with innoxious humility; he is poor, but his mind is his
treasure; he cultivates his reason, and she lifts him to the pinnacle of
truth; he learns to tear away the veil of self-love, folly, pride, and
prejudice, and bares the human heart to his inspection; he corrects and
amends; he repairs the breaches made by passion; the proud man passes
him by, and looks upon him with scorn; but he feels his own worth, that
ennobling consciousness which swells in every vein, and inspires him
with true pride--with manly independence: to such a man I could sooner
bow in reverence, than to the haughtiest, most successful candidate for
the world's ambition. But of such men, for the reason I have already
mentioned, our information is scanty. While of others, who have
commanded a greater share of public notoriety, venal or mistaken
admiration has given more than we wished to know. Among these respected
individuals of human nature, may be placed Mirabaud. Had Mirabaud been
an Englishman, who doubts but that we should have possessed at least
ample details of the usual subjects of biographical notice; while all
that has been collected among his own countrymen, is a scanty memoir in
a common dictionary. That we are doomed to remain ignorant of the life
of such men, speaks a loud disgrace.--I lament it.

JOHN BAPTISTE MIRABAUD, was born at Paris in the year 1674. He
prosecuted his infantile studies under the direction of his parents, and
was afterwards entered a member of the _Congregation of the Priests of
the Oratory_, where he passed several years, and produced some very bold
writings, which were never intended for publication.

He was subsequently appointed tutor to the princesses of the House of
Orleans, and then took the resolution of destroying the greater part of
the manuscripts that he produced while a member of the _Congregation_;
but the treachery of some of his friends, to whom he had confided his
manuscripts, rendered this precaution useless, for some of his works
were published during the time he remained the preceptor to his royal
pupils; among which number may be reckoned his "New Liberties of
Thought," a work but little calculated for gaining him friends in the
purlieus of the Court of Orleans. The "Origin and Antiquity of the
World," in three parts, was also published at this period, and from the
publication of this work, may be dated the resolution of M. de Mirabaud
to quit his office of preceptor, which he relinquished, having become
more independent; he now gave himself up entirely to his philosophical
studies, and produced the "System of Nature," with which he was assisted
by Diderot, D'Alembert, Baron D'Olbac, and others.

The profound metaphysical knowledge displayed throughout the System
of Nature, and the doctrines which are therein advanced, warrants the
conclusion, that it is at once the most decisive, boldest, and most
extraordinary work, that the human understanding ever had the courage to
produce. The study of metaphysics his generally been considered the most
terrific to the indolent mind; but the clear and perspicuous reasoning
of a Mirabaud, who has united the most profound argument, with the most
fascinating eloquence, charm and instruct us at the same time. But it
was not, to be expected that such doctrines as are contained in the
System of Nature, would be advanced without meeting with some opposition
from the superficial and bigoted metaphysicians, who feel an interest
in upholding a system of delusion and superstition. No! certainly not,
Their interest was threatened, and their _craft_ in danger, and the
consequence was, that the _Atheist_ or _Disciple of Nature_, has
been abused with every scurrilous epithet, "full of sound and fury,
signifying nothing."

Atheism is stigmatized with having "opened a wide door for libertinism,
destroying the social and moral compact; and striking a deadly blow
at religion. It is asserted that the atheist, who by his opinions has
deprived himself of the hope and consolation of a future life, has no
motive for the practise of virtue, or to contribute to the well being of
society. Deprived of a chimera which religion every where presents him,
he wanders through the cheerless gloom of scepticism, regardless of the
consequences of an abandoned life. Without a God, he acknowledges no
benefactor; without divine laws, he knows no rule for the conduct of
life, and submits to no law but his passions. An enemy to all social
order, he spurns at human laws, and breaks through every barrier opposed
to his wickedness." Under such colours is an atheist painted: a short
digression must be suffered to examine this picture, and to disprove the
assertions so sweepingly made.

I admit that atheism strikes a deadly blow at religion; because under
the cloak of religion, mankind have been oppressed in all ages; but that
it encourages libertinism, or destroys the "social and moral compact," I
have yet to learn. In all organized governments, men are restrained from
crime and compelled to submission by laws supposed to be made for the
general benefit. These laws are the effect of the first formation of
society for mutual preservation. Here then is a sufficient motive
for the one as well as the other, to contribute to the well-being of
society. The laws of Nature are the same in effect on the atheist
and the religionist. If man be led captive by his passions, and gives
himself to debauchery and voluptuousness, nature will punish him with
bodily infirmities and a debilitated mind. If he be intemperate, she
will shorten his days and bring him to the grave with the most poignant
remorse. The fatal effects of his vicious propensities will fall upon
his own head. A disturber of social order will live in continual fear
of the vengeance of society, and that very fear is a more dreadful
punishment than the just vengeance which perhaps he escapes. It renders
life burdensome, and makes a man hateful to himself. Can men have
stronger motives for the practise of virtue? The atheist is in full
possession of these motives, and the religionist is most completely
swayed by them, whatever may be his pretensions to others derived
from religion. But we are assured he has other motives; more powerful
incentives, in the promise of future rewards and punishments. This, like
all other chimerical doctrines, cannot be maintained if we look at the
general practise of mankind. Let us trace the effects of this doctrine,
or rather let us examine the actions, conduct, and character of men
professing it, and we shall see how little influence it has over them.
The bulk of society believe they shall answer in a future life for the
deeds done in the present. Nay, I hardly think one in a hundred thousand
will say they doubt it. What then is its effect? With this dreadful
sentence, _"Thou shalt go into everlasting punishment,"_ continually
sounded in their ears, do we not daily see the greatest enormities
committed? Are not the most horrid crimes perpetrated in all parts
of the world? The most vicious propensities and the most extravagant
follies are almost indiscriminately gratified. Is not vice frequently
triumphant, and virtue compelled to seek her own reward in retirement?
The laws of society are broken by the most flagrant injustice, and the
laws of nature outraged by the most shocking depravity. All this evil
exists in nations believing themselves to be accountable beings after
death. Where then are the beneficial effects arising, to mankind from
the promulgation of this doctrine? Men who cannot be restrained from
doing evil by human laws, have no dread of any other. Their whole lives
and conduct confirm this. Others who live in submission to the laws of
society, give themselves up to those vicious habits, (without fear of
divine laws) which the law does not take cognizance of. Men, not wholly
depraved, or not without the pale of society, generally respect the
laws, and fear the bad opinion of others. Hence we observe, when
interest or passion leads them into secret vices, they invariably play
the hypocrite; and although they are aware of the denunciations of their
God, whom they acknowledge is a witness to all their actions, while they
preserve their fair fame they still persevere. In fact, they live as if
they disbelieved in his existence; and yet the greatest criminal, the
most depraved wretch, would shudder at being told there is no God. The
atheist, as a man, is liable to commit the same crimes, and fall into
the same vices as the believer; but because he is an atheist, is he a
worse criminal than the other? In one respect, I conceive he is not so
bad. He only acts in defiance of _human_ laws,--he only offends men; the
other infringes _both divine_ and _human_;--he defies both God and man.
Both are injurious to society and themselves, and both are actuated by
the came motives.

Again we are told, that the well disposed part of mankind are rendered
more virtuous, and the vicious less vicious by this doctrine. How are
we to know that? If the virtuous man acts uprightly, does good to his
fellow creatures, restrains his passions, and returns good for evil,
experience teaches him it is his interest so to do. Those who are
viciously disposed are only deterred from crime by penal laws. Societies
cannot long exist, where evil has the ascendency. Without social
laws, this would really be the case, notwithstanding the threats of an
avenging God. If men were told they would not be answerable for the evil
committed in this life to human laws, but that God would punish them
after death, it is evident the human race would soon be exterminated.
On the other hand, tell them their crimes will never be punished by God,
or, in other words, there is no other God than NATURE, but that the laws
of men will avenge the offences against society; so long as those
laws are administered with justice and impartiality, so long will such
society continue to improve. Hence it is evident that the system which
will maintain order in society by itself, must be the best and most
rational. A good government without religion would be more solid and
lasting, and tend more to the preservation of mankind, than all the
theocratical or ecclesiastical governments that ever the world was
subject to.--Thus much for the opponents of atheism.

It has been asserted with a perverse obstinacy, by the advocates for the
existence of a deity, that the SYSTEM OF NATURE was never written by
the author whose name it bears.--It is granted that it was not published
during his life: but that circumstance forms no reason why such a
conclusion should be drawn. The persecutions which the atheists have
endured, were a sufficient excuse for the work not appearing in any form
during the life time of its venerable author. The Athenians sought to
try Diagoras the Melian, for atheism; but he fled from Athens, and a
price was offered for his head. Protagoras was banished from Athens, and
his books burnt, because he ventured to assert, that he knew nothing of
the gods. Stephen Dolet was burnt at Paris for atheism. Giordano Bruno
was burnt by the Inquisitors in Italy. Lucilio Vanini was burnt at
Thoulouse, through the kind offices of an Attorney-General. Bayle
was under the necessity of fleeing to Holland. Casimio Liszynski was
executed at Grodno;--and Akenhead at Edinborough. And the body of the
eloquent and erudite Hume, was obliged to be watched many nights by his
friends, lest it should be taken up by the fanatics, who considered him
one of the greatest monsters of iniquity, because he did not happen to
believe as they believed.--With these pictures of Christian persecution
before his eyes, is it surprising that M. de Mirabaud should adopt the
resolution of suffering the SYSTEM OF NATURE to appear as a posthumous
work? That the same fate would have attended him, the most devout
Christian will not undertake to deny.

However the sentiments of M. de Mirabaud may be condemned by the
fanatics, all those who knew him bear the most brilliant testimony of
his integrity, candour, and the soundness of his understanding; in a
word, to his social virtues, and the innocence of his manners. He died
universally regretted, at Paris, the twenty-fourth of June, 1760, in the
eighty-sixth year of his age.

The following works, written by him at different periods, were never
published:--_The Life of Jesus Christ. Impartial Reflections on the
Gospel. The Morality of Nature. An Abridged History of the Priesthood;
Ancient and Modern. The Opinions of the Ancients concerning the Jews._ A
wretched mutilated edition of this last work was published at Amsterdam,
in 1740, in two small volumes, under the title of _Miscellaneous
Dissertations_.


FINIS.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The System of Nature, Volume 2, by
Paul Henri Thiery (Baron D'Holbach)

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SYSTEM OF NATURE, VOLUME 2 ***

***** This file should be named 8910-8.txt or 8910-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/9/1/8910/

Produced by Freethought Archives and Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
